2.6 Regular Expressions
====
Most of Ruby’s built-in types will be familiar to all programmers. A majority of languages have strings, integers, floats, arrays, and so on. However, regular expression support is typically built into only scripting languages, such as Ruby, Perl, and awk. This is a shame, because regular expressions, although cryptic, are a powerful tool for working with text. And having them built in, rather than tacked on through a library interface, makes a big difference.

Entire books have been written about regular expressions (for example, Mastering Regular Expressions [Fri97]), so we won’t try to cover everything in this short section. Instead, we’ll look at just a few examples of regular expressions in action. You’ll find full coverage of regular expressions in Chapter 7, ​Regular Expressions​.

A regular expression is simply a way of specifying a ​ pattern​ of characters to be matched in a string. In Ruby, you typically create a regular expression by writing a pattern between slash characters (/​pattern​/). And, Ruby being Ruby, regular expressions are objects and can be manipulated as such.

For example, you could write a pattern that matches a string containing the text ​Perl​ or the text ​Python​ using the following regular expression:
```ruby
	/Perl|Python/
```
The forward slashes delimit the pattern, which consists of the two things we’re matching, separated by a pipe character (​|​). This pipe character means “either the thing on the right or the thing on the left,” in this case either ​Perl​ or ​Python​. You can use parentheses within patterns, just as you can in arithmetic expressions, so you could also have written this pattern like this:
```ruby
		/P(erl|ython)/
```
You can also specify ​ repetition​ within patterns. ​/ab+c/​ matches a string containing an ​a​ followed by one or more ​b​’s, followed by a ​c​. Change the plus to an asterisk, and ​/ab*c/​ creates a regular expression that matches one ​a​, zero or more ​b​’s, and one ​c​.

You can also match one of a group of characters within a pattern. Some common examples are ​ character classes​ such as ​\s​, which matches a whitespace character (space, tab, newline, and so on); ​\d​, which matches any digit; and ​\w​, which matches any character that may appear in a typical word. A dot (.) matches (almost) any character. A table of these character classes appears in Table 2, ​Character class abbreviations​.

We can put all this together to produce some useful regular expressions:

```ruby	
/​\d\d​:​\d\d​:​\d\d​/     ​# a time such as 12:34:56​​ 	
/Perl.*Python/       ​# Perl, zero or more other chars, then Python​​ 	
/Perl Python/        ​# Perl, a space, and Python​​ 	
/Perl *Python/       ​# Perl, zero or more spaces, and Python​​ 	
/Perl +Python/       ​# Perl, one or more spaces, and Python​​ 	
/Perl​\s​+Python/      ​# Perl, whitespace characters, then Python​ 	
/Ruby (Perl|Python)/ ​# Ruby, a space, and either Perl or Python​
```
Once you have created a pattern, it seems a shame not to use it. The match operator ​=~​ can be used to match a string against a regular expression. If the pattern is found in the string, ​=~​ returns its starting position; otherwise, it returns ​nil​. This means you can use regular expressions as the condition in ​if​ and ​while​ statements. For example, the following code fragment writes a message if a string contains the text ​Perl​ or ​Python​:
```ruby
line = gets​ 	
  if​ line =~ /Perl|Python/
    puts ​"Scripting language mentioned: ​#{line}​"​​ 	
end​
```
The part of a string matched by a regular expression can be replaced with different text using one of Ruby’s substitution methods:
```ruby	
line = gets​ 	
newline   = line.sub(/Perl/, ​'Ruby'​)       ​# replace first 'Perl' with 'Ruby'​​ 	
newerline = newline.gsub(/Python/, ​'Ruby'​) ​# replace every 'Python' with 'Ruby'​
```
You can replace every occurrence of ​Perl​ and ​Python​ with ​Ruby​ using this:
```ruby 	
line = gets​ 	
newline = line.gsub(/Perl|Python/, ​'Ruby'​)
We’ll have a lot more to say about regular expressions as we go through the book.
```