2.8 Reading and ’Riting
====
Ruby comes with a comprehensive I/O library. However, in most of the examples in this book, we’ll stick to a few simple methods. We’ve already come across two methods that do output: ​puts​ writes its arguments with a newline after each; ​print​ also writes its arguments but with no newline. Both can be used to write to any I/O object, but by default they write to standard output.

Another output method we use a lot is ​printf​ , which prints its arguments under the control of a format string (just like ​printf​ in C or Perl):
```ruby
printf(​"Number: %5.2f,\nString: %s\n"​, 1.23, ​"hello"​)
```
Produces:
```
Number:  1.23,
String: hello
```
In this example, the format string ​"Number: %5.2f,\nString: %s\n"​ tells ​printf​ to substitute in a floating-point number (with a minimum of five characters, two after the decimal point) and a string. Notice the newlines (​\n​) embedded in the string; each moves the output onto the next line.

You have many ways to read input into your program. Probably the most traditional is to use the method ​gets​ , which returns the next line from your program’s standard input stream:
```ruby​
line = gets
print line
```
Because ​gets​ returns ​nil​ when it reaches the end of input, you can use its return value in a loop condition. Notice that in the following code the condition to the ​while​ is an assignment: we store whatever ​gets​ returns into the variable ​line​ and then test to see whether that returned value was ​nil​ or ​false​ before continuing:
```ruby
​while​ line = gets​ 	
  print line​ 	
​end​
```