3.1 Objects and Attributes
The ​BookInStock​ objects we’ve created so far have an internal state (the ISBN and price). That state is private to those objects—no other object can access an object’s instance variables. In general, this is a Good Thing. It means that the object is solely responsible for maintaining its own consistency.

However, an object that is totally secretive is pretty useless—you can create it, but then you can’t do anything with it. You’ll normally define methods that let you access and manipulate the state of an object, allowing the outside world to interact with the object. These externally visible facets of an object are called its ​ attributes​ .

For our ​BookInStock​ objects, the first thing we may need is the ability to find out the ISBN and price (so we can count each distinct book and perform price calculations). One way of doing that is to write accessor methods:
```ruby
​class​ BookInStock​ 	
  ​def​ initialize(isbn, price)​ 	
    @isbn  = isbn​ 	
    @price = Float(price)​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ isbn​ 	
    @isbn​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ price​ 	
    @price​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​# ..​
​end​
​ 	
book = BookInStock.new(​"isbn1"​, 12.34)​ 	
puts ​"ISBN   = ​#{book.isbn}​"​​ 	
puts ​"Price  = ​#{book.price}​"
```​
Produces:
```ruby
ISBN   = isbn1
Price  = 12.34
```
Here we’ve defined two accessor methods to return the values of the two instance variables. The method ​isbn​ , for example, returns the value of the instance variable ​@isbn​ (because the last thing executed in the method is the expression that simply evaluates the ​@isbn​ variable).

Because writing accessor methods is such a common idiom, Ruby provides a convenient shortcut. ​attr_reader​ creates these attribute reader methods for you:
```ruby
​class​ BookInStock​ 	
  attr_reader :isbn, :price
  ​def​ initialize(isbn, price)​ 	
    @isbn  = isbn​ 	
    @price = Float(price)​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
  ​# ..​
​end​

book = BookInStock.new(​"isbn1"​, 12.34)​ 	
puts ​"ISBN   = ​#{book.isbn}​"​​ 	
puts ​"Price  = ​#{book.price}​"
```
Produces:
```ruby	
ISBN   = isbn1​ 	
Price  = 12.34
```
This is the first time we’ve used ​ symbols​ in this chapter. As we discussed, symbols are just a convenient way of referencing a name. In this code, you can think of ​:isbn​ as meaning the ​name ​ ​isbn​ and think of plain ​isbn​ as meaning the ​value​ of the variable. In this example, we named the accessor methods ​isbn​ and ​price​. The corresponding instance variables are ​@isbn​ and ​@price​. These accessor methods are identical to the ones we wrote by hand earlier.

There’s a common misconception, particularly among people who come from languages such as Java and C#, that the ​attr_reader​ declaration somehow declares instance variables. It doesn’t. It creates the accessor methods, but the variables themselves don’t need to be declared—they just pop into existence when you use them. Ruby completely decouples instance variables and accessor methods, as we’ll see in ​Virtual Attributes​.

###Writable Attributes

Sometimes you need to be able to set an attribute from outside the object. For example, let’s assume that we have to discount the price of some titles after reading in the raw scan data.

In languages such as C# and Java, you’d do this with ​setter functions​:
```ruby
​class​ JavaBookInStock {                     ​// Java code​​ 	
  ​private​ ​double​ _price;​ 	
  ​public​ ​double​ getPrice() {​ 	
    ​return​ _price;​ 	
  }
​ 	
  ​public​ ​void​ setPrice(​double​ newPrice) {​ 	
    _price = newPrice;​ 	
  }​ 	
}
​ 
b = ​new​ JavaBookInStock(....);​ 	
b.setPrice(calculate_discount(b.getPrice()));
```
In Ruby, the attributes of an object can be accessed as if they were any other variable. We saw this earlier with phrases such as ​book.isbn​. So, it seems natural to be able to assign to these variables when you want to set the value of an attribute. You do that by creating a Ruby method whose name ends with an equals sign. These methods can be used as the target of assignments:
```ruby
​class​ BookInStock​ 	
  attr_reader :isbn, :price​ 	
  ​def​ initialize(isbn, price)​ 	
    @isbn  = isbn​ 	
    @price = Float(price)​ 	
  ​end​

  ​def​ price=(new_price)​ 	
    @price = new_price​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
  ​# ...​
​end​
​ 	
book = BookInStock.new(​"isbn1"​, 33.80)​ 	
puts ​"ISBN      = ​#{book.isbn}​"​​ 	
puts ​"Price     = ​#{book.price}​"​ 	
book.price = book.price * 0.75        ​# discount price​​ 	
puts ​"New price = ​#{book.price}​"​
```
Produces:
```ruby
ISBN      = isbn1​ 	
Price     = 33.8​ 	
New price = 25.349999999999998
```
The assignment ​book.price = book.price * 0.75​ invokes the method ​price=​ in the ​book​ object, passing it the discounted price as an argument. If you create a method whose name ends with an equals sign, that name can appear on the left side of an assignment.

Again, Ruby provides a shortcut for creating these simple attribute-setting methods. If you want a write-only accessor, you can use the form ​attr_writer​ , but that’s fairly rare. You’re far more likely to want both a reader and a writer for a given attribute, so you’ll use the handy-dandy ​attr_accessor​ method:
```ruby
​class​ BookInStock​ 	
  attr_reader   :isbn​ 	
  attr_accessor :price​ 	
​ 	
  ​def​ initialize(isbn, price)​ 	
    @isbn  = isbn​ 	
    @price = Float(price)​ 	
  ​end​
  ​# ...​
​end​

book = BookInStock.new(​"isbn1"​, 33.80)​ 	
puts ​"ISBN      = ​#{book.isbn}​"​​ 	
puts ​"Price     = ​#{book.price}​"​ 	
book.price = book.price * 0.75        ​# discount price​​ 	
puts ​"New price = ​#{book.price}​"​
```
Produces:
```ruby
ISBN      = isbn1​ 	
Price     = 33.8​ 	
New price = 25.349999999999998
```
###Virtual Attributes
These attribute-accessing methods do not have to be just simple wrappers around an object’s instance variables. For example, you may want to access the price as an exact number of cents, rather than as a floating-point number of dollars.[20]
```ruby
​class​ BookInStock​​ 	
  attr_reader   :isbn​ 	
  attr_accessor :price​ 	
​ 	
  ​def​ initialize(isbn, price)​ 	
    @isbn  = isbn​ 	
    @price = Float(price)​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​ 	
  ​def​ price_in_cents​ 	
    Integer(price*100 + 0.5)​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
  ​# ...​
​end​
​ 	
book = BookInStock.new(​"isbn1"​, 33.80)​ 	
puts ​"Price          = ​#{book.price}​"​​ 	
puts ​"Price in cents = ​#{book.price_in_cents}​"
```
Produces:​ 	
```ruby
Price          = 33.8​ 	
Price in cents = 3380
```
We can take this even further and allow people to assign to our virtual attribute, mapping the value to the instance variable internally:
```ruby
​class​ BookInStock​ 	
  attr_reader   :isbn​ 	
  attr_accessor :price 	
​ 	
  ​def​ initialize(isbn, price)​ 	
    @isbn  = isbn​ 	
    @price = Float(price)​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ price_in_cents​ 	
    Integer(price*100 + 0.5)​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​ 	
  ​def​ price_in_cents=(cents)​ 	
    @price = cents / 100.0​ 	
  ​end​
  ​# ...​

​end​
​ 	
book = BookInStock.new(​"isbn1"​, 33.80)​ 	
puts ​"Price          = ​#{book.price}​"​​ 	
puts ​"Price in cents = ​#{book.price_in_cents}​"​ 	
book.price_in_cents = 1234​ 	
puts ​"Price          = ​#{book.price}​"​ 	
puts ​"Price in cents = ​#{book.price_in_cents}​"​
```
Produces:
```ruby
Price          = 33.8​ 	
Price in cents = 3380​ 	
Price          = 12.34​ 	
Price in cents = 1234
```
Here we’ve used attribute methods to create a virtual instance variable. To the outside world, ​price_in_cents​ seems to be an attribute like any other. Internally, though, it has no corresponding instance variable.

This is more than a curiosity. In his landmark book Object-Oriented Software Construction [Mey97], Bertrand Meyer calls this the ​ Uniform Access Principle​ . By hiding the difference between instance variables and calculated values, you are shielding the rest of the world from the implementation of your class. You’re free to change how things work in the future without impacting the millions of lines of code that use your class. This is a big win.

###Attributes, Instance Variables, and Methods
This description of attributes may leave you thinking that they’re nothing more than methods—why’d we need to invent a fancy name for them? In a way, that’s absolutely right. An attribute ​is​ just a method. Sometimes an attribute simply returns the value of an instance variable. Sometimes an attribute returns the result of a calculation. And sometimes those funky methods with equals signs at the end of their names are used to update the state of an object. So, the question is, where do attributes stop and regular methods begin? What makes something an attribute and not just a plain old method? Ultimately, that’s one of those “angels on a pinhead” questions. Here’s a personal take.

When you design a class, you decide what internal state it has and also decide how that state is to appear on the outside (to users of your class). The internal state is held in instance variables. The external state is exposed through methods we’re calling ​ attributes​ . And the other actions your class can perform are just regular methods. It really isn’t a crucially important distinction, but by calling the external state of an object its attributes, you’re helping clue people in to how they should view the class you’ve written.