3.3 Access Control
====
When designing a class interface, it’s important to consider just how much of your class you’ll be exposing to the outside world. Allow too much access into your class, and you risk increasing the coupling in your application—users of your class will be tempted to rely on details of your class’s implementation, rather than on its logical interface. The good news is that the only easy way to change an object’s state in Ruby is by calling one of its methods. Control access to the methods, and you’ve controlled access to the object. A good rule of thumb is never to expose methods that could leave an object in an invalid state.

Ruby gives you three levels of protection:

​ Public methods​ can be called by anyone—no access control is enforced. Methods are public by default (except for ​initialize​ , which is always private).

​ Protected methods​ can be invoked only by objects of the defining class and its subclasses. Access is kept within the family.

​ Private methods​ cannot be called with an explicit receiver—the receiver is always the current object, also known as ​self​. This means that private methods can be called only in the context of the current object; you can’t invoke another object’s private methods.

The difference between “protected” and “private” is fairly subtle and is different in Ruby than in most common OO languages. If a method is protected, it may be called by ​any​ instance of the defining class or its subclasses. If a method is private, it may be called only within the context of the calling object—it is never possible to access another object’s private methods directly, even if the object is of the same class as the caller.

Ruby differs from other OO languages in another important way. Access control is determined dynamically, as the program runs, not statically. You will get an access violation only when the code attempts to execute the restricted method.

Specifying Access Control
You specify access levels to methods within class or module definitions using one or more of the three functions ​public​ , ​protected​ , and ​private​ . You can use each function in two different ways.

If used with no arguments, the three functions set the default access control of subsequently defined methods. This is probably familiar behavior if you’re a C++ or Java programmer, where you’d use keywords such as ​public​ to achieve the same effect:
```ruby
​class​ MyClass	
​ 	
  ​def​ method1    ​# default is 'public'​​ 	
    ​#...​​ 	
  ​end​

protected        ​# subsequent methods will be 'protected'​​ 	
  ​def​ method2    ​# will be 'protected'​​ 	
    ​#...​​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​ 	
private          ​# subsequent methods will be 'private'​​ 	
  ​def​ method3    ​# will be 'private'​​ 	
    ​#...​​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​ 	
public           ​# subsequent methods will be 'public'​​ 	
  ​def​ method4    ​# so this will be 'public'​​ 	
    ​#...​​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
​end​
```
Alternatively, you can set access levels of named methods by listing them as arguments to the access control functions:
```ruby
​class​ MyClass
​ 	
  ​def​ method1​ 	
  ​
  end​
​ 	
  ​def​ method2
​ 	
  ​end​

  ​# ... and so on​
​ 	 	
  public    :method1, :method4
​ 	
  protected :method2
​ 	
  private   :method3
​ 	
​end​
```
It’s time for some examples. Perhaps we’re modeling an accounting system where every debit has a corresponding credit. Because we want to ensure that no one can break this rule, we’ll make the methods that do the debits and credits private, and we’ll define our external interface in terms of transactions.
```ruby
​class​ Account​ 	
  attr_accessor :balance
​ 	
  ​def​ initialize(balance)​ 	
    @balance = balance​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
​end​
​ 	​ 	
​class​ Transaction​ 	
  ​def​ initialize(account_a, account_b)​ 	
    @account_a = account_a​ 	
    @account_b = account_b​ 	
  ​end​ 	
​ 	
private​ 	
  ​def​ debit(account, amount)​ 	
    account.balance -= amount​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ credit(account, amount)​ 	
    account.balance += amount​ 	
  ​end​ 	
​ 	
public​ 	
  ​#...​​ 	
  ​def​ transfer(amount)​ 	
    debit(@account_a, amount)​ 	
    credit(@account_b, amount)​ 	
  ​end​
  ​#...​
​ 	
​end​
​ 	
savings = Account.new(100)​ 	
checking = Account.new(200)​ 	
trans = Transaction.new(checking, savings)​ 	
trans.transfer(50)
```
Protected access is used when objects need to access the internal state of other objects of the same class. For example, we may want to allow individual ​Account​ objects to compare their cleared balances but to hide those balances from the rest of the world (perhaps because we present them in a different form):
```ruby
​class​ Account​ 	
  attr_reader :cleared_balance  ​# accessor method 'cleared_balance'​
​ 	
  protected   :cleared_balance  ​# but make it protected​​ 	
​ 	
  ​def​ greater_balance_than?(other)​ 	
    @cleared_balance > other.cleared_balance​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
​end​
```
Because ​cleared_balance​ is protected, it’s available only within ​Account​ objects.