3.4 Variables
====
Now that we’ve gone to the trouble to create all these objects, let’s make sure we don’t lose them. Variables are used to keep track of objects; each variable holds a reference to an object. Let’s confirm this with some code:
```ruby
person = ​"Tim"​ 	
puts ​"The object in 'person' is a ​#{person.class}​"​​ 	
puts ​"The object has an id of ​#{person.object_id}​"​​ 	
puts ​"and a value of '​#{person}​'"​
```
Produces:
```ruby
The object in 'person' is a String​ 	
The object has an id of 70230663692980​ 	
and a value of 'Tim'
```
On the first line, Ruby creates a new string object with the value ​Tim​. A reference to this object is placed in the local variable ​person​. A quick check shows that the variable has indeed taken on the personality of a string, with an object ID, a class, and a value.

So, is a variable an object? In Ruby, the answer is “no.” A variable is simply a reference to an object. Objects float around in a big pool somewhere (the heap, most of the time) and are pointed to by variables. Let’s make the example slightly more complicated:
```ruby
person1 = ​"Tim"​​ 	
person2 = person1​ 	
person1[0] = ​'J'​​ 	
​ 	
puts ​"person1 is ​#{person1}​"​​ 	
puts ​"person2 is ​#{person2}​"​
```
Produces:
```ruby
person1 is Jim​ 	
person2 is Jim
```
What happened here? We changed the first character of ​person1​ (Ruby strings are mutable, unlike Java), but both ​person1​ and ​person2​ changed from ​Tim​ to ​Jim​.

It all comes back to the fact that variables hold references to objects, not the objects themselves. Assigning ​person1​ to ​person2​ doesn’t create any new objects; it simply copies ​person1​’s object reference to ​person2​ so that both ​person1​ and ​person2​ refer to the same object.


Assignment ​ aliases​ objects, potentially giving you multiple variables that reference the same object. But can’t this cause problems in your code? It can, but not as often as you’d think (objects in Java, for example, work exactly the same way). In the previous example, for instance, you could avoid aliasing by using the ​dup​ method of ​String​, which creates a new string object with identical contents:
```ruby
person1 = ​"Tim"​​ 	
person2 = person1.dup​ 	
person1[0] = ​"J"​​ 	
puts ​"person1 is ​#{person1}​"​​ 	
puts ​"person2 is ​#{person2}​"​
```
Produces:
```ruby
person1 is Jim​ 	
person2 is Tim
```
You can also prevent anyone from changing a particular object by freezing it. Attempt to alter a frozen object, and Ruby will raise a ​RuntimeError​ exception:
```ruby
person1 = ​"Tim"​​ 	
person2 = person1​ 	
person1.freeze       ​# prevent modifications to the object​
person2[0] = ​"J"​
```
Produces:
```ruby
        from prog.rb:4:in `<main>'
​ 	
prog.rb:4:in `[]=': can't modify frozen String (RuntimeError)
```
There’s more to say about classes and objects in Ruby. We still have to look at class methods and at concepts such as mixins and inheritance. We’ll do that in Chapter 5, ​Sharing Functionality: Inheritance, Modules, and Mixins​. But, for now, know that everything you manipulate in Ruby is an object and that objects start life as instances of classes. And one of the most common things we do with objects is create collections of them. But that’s the subject of our next chapter.

Footnotes
[19]	
Yes, we know. We shouldn’t be holding prices in inexact old floats. Ruby has classes that hold fixed-point values exactly, but we want to look at classes, not arithmetic, in this section.

[20]	
We multiply the floating-point price by 100 to get the price in cents but then add 0.5 before converting to an integer. Why? Because floating-point numbers don’t always have an exact internal representation. When we multiply 33.8 by 100, we get 3379.99999999999954525265. The ​Integer​ method would truncate this to 3379. Adding 0.5 before calling ​Integer​ rounds up the floating-point value, ensuring we get the best integer representation. This is a good example of why you want to use ​BigDecimal​, not ​Float​, in financial calculations.

[21]	
If you encounter an error along the lines of "‘Float’: can’t convert nil into Float (TypeError)" when you run this code, you likely have extra spaces at the end of the header line in your CSV data file. The CSV library is pretty strict about the formats it accepts.