6.1 Numbers
=====
Ruby supports integers and floating-point, rational, and complex numbers. Integers can be any length (up to a maximum determined by the amount of free memory on your system). Integers within a certain range (normally -230...230-1 or -262...262-1) are held internally in binary form and are objects of class ​Fixnum​. Integers outside this range are stored in objects of class ​Bignum​ (currently implemented as a variable-length set of short integers). This process is transparent, and Ruby automatically manages the conversion back and forth:
```ruby
num = 10001​ 	
4.times ​do​​ 	
  puts ​"​#{num.class}​: ​#{num}​"​​ 	
num *= num​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
Fixnum: 10001​ 	
Fixnum: 100020001​ 	
Fixnum: 10004000600040001​ 	
Bignum: 100080028005600700056002800080001
```
You write integers using an optional leading sign, an optional base indicator (​0​ for octal, ​0d​ for decimal [the default], ​0x​ for hex, or ​0b​ for binary), followed by a string of digits in the appropriate base. Underscore characters are ignored in the digit string (some folks use them in place of commas in larger numbers).
```ruby
123456                   => 123456   ​# Fixnum​​ 	
0d123456                 => 123456   ​# Fixnum​​ 	
123_456                  => 123456   ​# Fixnum - underscore ignored​​ 	
-543                     => -543     ​# Fixnum - negative number​​ 	
0xaabb                   => 43707    ​# Fixnum - hexadecimal​​ 	
0377                     => 255      ​# Fixnum - octal​​ 	
-0b10_1010               => -42      ​# Fixnum - binary (negated)​​ 	
123_456_789_123_456_789  => 123456789123456789 ​# Bignum​
````
A numeric literal with a decimal point and/or an exponent is turned into a ​Float​ object, corresponding to the native architecture’s double data type. You must both precede and follow the decimal point with a digit (if you write ​1.0e3​ as ​1.e3​, Ruby will try to invoke the method ​e3​ on the object ​1​).

Ruby includes support for rational and complex numbers. Rational numbers are the ratio of two integers—they are fractions—and hence have an exact representation (unlike floats). Complex numbers represent points on the complex plane. They have two components, the real and imaginary parts.

Ruby doesn’t have a literal syntax for representing rational and complex numbers. Instead, you create them using explicit calls to the constructor methods ​Rational​ and ​Complex​ (although, as we’ll see, you can use the mathn library to make working with rational numbers easier).
```ruby
Rational(3, 4) * Rational(2, 3)    ​# => (1/2)​​ 	
Rational(​"3/4"​) * Rational(​"2/3"​)  ​# => (1/2)​​ 	
Complex(1, 2) * Complex(3, 4)      ​# => (-5+10i)​​ 	
Complex(​"1+2i"​) * Complex(​"3+4i"​)  ​# => (-5+10i)​
```
All numbers are objects and respond to a variety of messages (listed in full starting in the reference section at the end of this book). So, unlike (say) C++, you find the absolute value of a number by writing ​num.abs​, not ​abs(num)​.

Finally, we’ll offer a warning for Perl users. Strings that contain just digits are ​not​ automatically converted into numbers when used in expressions. This tends to bite most often when reading numbers from a file. For example, we may want to find the sum of the two numbers on each line for a file such as the following:
```ruby
3 4​ 	
5 6​ 	
7 8
```
The following code doesn’t work:
```ruby
some_file.each ​do​ |line| 	
  v1, v2 = line.split    ​# split line on spaces​​ 	
  print v1 + v2, ​" "​​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
34 56 78
```
The problem is that the input was read as strings, not numbers. The plus operator concatenates strings, so that’s what we see in the output. To fix this, use the ​Integer​ method to convert the strings to integers:
```ruby
some_file.each ​do​ |line|​ 	
  v1, v2 = line.split​ 	
  print Integer(v1) + Integer(v2), ​" "​​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
7 11 15
```
###How Numbers Interact
Most of the time, numbers work the way you’d expect. If you perform some operation between two numbers of the same class, the answer will typically be a number of that same class (although, as we’ve seen, fixnums can become bignums, and vice versa). If the two numbers are different classes, the result will have the class of the more general one. If you mix integers and floats, the result will be a float; if you mix floats and complex numbers, the result will be complex.
```ruby
1 + 2               ​# => 3​​ 	
1 + 2.0             ​# => 3.0​​ 	
1.0 + 2             ​# => 3.0​​ 	
1.0 + Complex(1,2)  ​# => (2.0+2i)​​ 	
1 + Rational(2,3)   ​# => (5/3)​​ 	
1.0 + Rational(2,3) ​# => 1.6666666666666665​
```
The return-type rule still applies when it comes to division. However, this often confuses folks, because division between two integers yields an integer result:
```ruby
1.0 / 2   ​# => 0.5​​ 	
1 / 2.0   ​# => 0.5​​ 	
1 / 2     ​# => 0​
```
If you’d prefer that integer division instead return a fraction (a ​Rational​ number), require the mathn library (described in the library section). This will cause arithmetic operations to attempt to find the most ​natural​ representation for their results. For integer division where the result isn’t an integer, a fraction will be returned.
```ruby
22 / 7                  ​# => 3​​ 	
Complex::I * Complex::I ​# => (-1+0i)​ 	
​ 	
require ​'mathn'​​ 	
22 / 7                  ​# => (22/7)​​ 	
Complex::I * Complex::I ​# => -1​
```
Note that ​22/7​ is effectively a rational literal once ​mathn​ is loaded (albeit one that’s calculated at runtime).

###Looping Using Numbers
Integers also support several iterators. We’ve seen one already: ​5.times​. Others include ​upto​ and ​downto​ for iterating up and down between two integers. Class ​Numeric​ also provides the more general method ​step​ , which is more like a traditional ​for​ loop.
```ruby
3.times        { print ​"X "​ }​ 	
1.upto(5)      {|i| print i, ​" "​ }​ 	
99.downto(95)  {|i| print i, ​" "​ }​ 	
50.step(80, 5) {|i| print i, ​" "​ }
```
Produces:
```ruby
X X X 1 2 3 4 5 99 98 97 96 95 50 55 60 65 70 75 80
```
As with other iterators, if you leave the block off, the call returns an ​Enumerator​ object:
```ruby
10.downto(7).with_index {|num, index| puts ​"​#{index}​: ​#{num}​"​}
```
Produces:
```ruby
0: 10​
1: 9​ 	
2: 8​ 	
3: 7
```
