2.2 Some Basic Ruby
=====
Not many people like to read heaps of boring syntax rules when they’re picking up a new language, so we’re going to cheat. In this section, we’ll hit some of the highlights—the stuff you’ll just ​need​ to know if you’re going to write Ruby programs. Later, in Chapter 22, ​The Ruby Language​, we’ll go into all the gory details.

Let’s start with a simple Ruby program. We’ll write a method that returns a cheery, personalized greeting. We’ll then invoke that method a couple of times:
```ruby
​def​ say_goodnight(name)​ 	
  result = ​"Good night, "​ + name​ 	
  ​return​ result​ 	
​end​

​# Time for bed...​​ 	
puts say_goodnight(​"John-Boy"​)​ 	
puts say_goodnight(​"Mary-Ellen"​)
```
Produces:
```ruby
Good night, John-Boy​ 	
Good night, Mary-Ellen
```
As the example shows, Ruby syntax is clean. You don’t need semicolons at the ends of statements as long as you put each statement on a separate line. Ruby comments start with a ​#​ character and run to the end of the line. Code layout is pretty much up to you; indentation is not significant (but using two-character indentation will make you friends in the community if you plan on distributing your code).

Methods are defined with the keyword ​def​, followed by the method name (in this case, the name is ​say_goodnight​ ) and the method’s parameters between parentheses. (In fact, the parentheses are optional, but we like to use them.) Ruby doesn’t use braces to delimit the bodies of compound statements and definitions. Instead, you simply finish the body with the keyword ​end​. Our method’s body is pretty simple. The first line concatenates the literal string ​"Good night,␣"​ and the parameter ​name​ and assigns the result to the local variable ​result​. The next line returns that result to the caller. Note that we didn’t have to declare the variable ​result​; it sprang into existence when we assigned to it.

Having defined the method, we invoke it twice. In both cases, we pass the result to the method ​puts​ , which simply outputs its argument followed by a newline (moving on to the next line of output):
```ruby
Good night, John-Boy​ 	
Good night, Mary-Ellen
```
The line
```ruby
puts say_goodnight(​"John-Boy"​)
```
contains two method calls, one to the method ​say_goodnight​ and the other to the method ​puts​ . Why does one call have its arguments in parentheses while the other doesn’t? In this case, it’s purely a matter of taste. The following lines are equivalent:
```ruby
puts say_goodnight(​"John-Boy"​)​ 	
puts(say_goodnight(​"John-Boy"​))
```
However, life isn’t always that simple, and precedence rules can make it difficult to know which argument goes with which method invocation, so we recommend using parentheses in all but the simplest cases.
This example also shows some Ruby string objects. Ruby has many ways to create a string object, but probably the most common is to use ​ string literals​ , which are sequences of characters between single or double quotation marks. The difference between the two forms is the amount of processing Ruby does on the string while constructing the literal. In the single-quoted case, Ruby does very little. With a few exceptions, what you enter in the string literal becomes the string’s value.

In the double-quoted case, Ruby does more work. First, it looks for substitutions (sequences that start with a backslash character) and replaces them with some binary value. The most common of these is ​\n​, which is replaced with a newline character. When a string containing a newline is output, that newline becomes a line break:
```ruby
puts ​"And good night,\nGrandma"​
```
Produces:
```ruby
And good night,
Grandma
```
The second thing that Ruby does with double-quoted strings is expression interpolation. Within the string, the sequence ​#{​expression​}​ is replaced by the value of ​expression​. We could use this to rewrite our previous method:
```ruby 	
​def​ say_goodnight(name)​ 	
  result = ​"Good night, ​#{name}​"​​ 	
  ​return​ result​ 	
​end​
​ 	
puts say_goodnight(​'Pa'​)
```
Produces:
```ruby
Good night, Pa
```
When Ruby constructs this string object, it looks at the current value of ​name​ and substitutes it into the string. Arbitrarily complex expressions are allowed in the `​#{...}​ `construct. In the following example, we invoke the ​capitalize​ method, defined for all strings, to output our parameter with a leading uppercase letter:
```ruby
​def​ say_goodnight(name)​ 	
  result = ​"Good night, ​#{name.capitalize}​"​​ 	
  ​return​ result​ 	
​end​
puts say_goodnight(​'uncle'​)
```
Produces:
```ruby 	
Good night, Uncle
```
For more information on strings, as well as on the other Ruby standard types, see Chapter 6, ​Standard Types​.

Finally, we could simplify this method some more. The value returned by a Ruby method is the value of the last expression evaluated, so we can get rid of the temporary variable and the ​return​ statement altogether. This is idiomatic Ruby.
```ruby
​def​ say_goodnight(name)​ 	
  ​"Good night, ​#{name.capitalize}​"​​ 	
​end​
​ 	
puts say_goodnight(​'ma'​)
```
Produces:
```ruby
Good night, Ma
```
We promised that this section would be brief. We have just one more topic to cover: Ruby names. For brevity, we’ll be using some terms (such as ​ class variable​ ) that we aren’t going to define here. However, by talking about the rules now, you’ll be ahead of the game when we actually come to discuss class variables and the like later.

Ruby uses a convention that may seem strange at first: the first characters of a name indicate how the name is used. Local variables, method parameters, and method names should all start with a lowercase letter[16] or an underscore. Global variables are prefixed with a dollar sign ($), and instance variables begin with an “at” sign (@). Class variables start with two “at” signs (@@).[17] Finally, class names, module names, and constants must start with an uppercase letter. Samples of different names are given in Table 1, ​Example variable, class, and constant names​.

Following this initial character, a name can be any combination of letters, digits, and underscores (with the proviso that the character following an @ sign may not be a digit). However, by convention, multiword instance variables are written with underscores between the words, and multiword class names are written in MixedCase (with each word capitalized). Method names may end with the characters `?`, `!`, and `=`.

```ruby
				Table 1. Example variable, class, and constant names
Local Variable:		 name   fish_and_chips   x_axis   thx1138   _x   _26
Instance Variable: @name   @point_1   @X   @_   @plan9
Class Variable:    @@total   @@symtab   @@N   @@x_pos   @@SINGLE
Global Variable:   $debug   $CUSTOMER   $_   $plan9   $Global
Class Name:        String   ActiveRecord   MyClass
Constant Name:		 FEET_PER_MILE   DEBUG
```
