2.3 Arrays and Hashes
====
Ruby’s arrays and hashes are indexed collections. Both store collections of objects, accessible using a key. With arrays, the key is an integer, whereas hashes support any object as a key. Both arrays and hashes grow as needed to hold new elements. It’s more efficient to access array elements, but hashes provide more flexibility. Any particular array or hash can hold objects of differing types; you can have an array containing an integer, a string, and a floating-point number, as we’ll see in a minute.

You can create and initialize a new array object using an ​`array literal`​ —a set of elements between square brackets. Given an array object, you can access individual elements by supplying an index between square brackets, as the next example shows. Note that Ruby array indices start at zero.
```ruby
a = [ 1, ​'cat'​, 3.14 ]   ​# array with three elements​
puts ​"The first element is ​#{a[0]}​"​
​# set the third element​
a[2] = nil 	
puts ​"The array is now ​#{a.inspect}​"​
```
Produces:
```ruby 	
The first element is 1
The array is now [1, "cat", nil]
```
You may have noticed that we used the special value ​nil​ in this example. In many languages, the concept of ​nil​ (or ​null​) means “no object.” In Ruby, that’s not the case; ​nil​ is an object, just like any other, that happens to represent nothing. Anyway, let’s get back to arrays and hashes.

Sometimes creating arrays of words can be a pain, what with all the quotes and commas. Fortunately, Ruby has a shortcut; ​%w​ does just what we want:
```ruby
a = [ ​'ant'​, ​'bee'​, ​'cat'​, ​'dog'​, ​'elk'​ ]
a[0]      ​# => "ant"​
a[3]      ​# => "dog"​
​# this is the same:​
a = ​%w{ ant bee cat dog elk }​
a[0]      ​# => "ant"​ 	
a[3]      ​# => "dog"​
```

Ruby hashes are similar to arrays. A hash literal uses braces rather than square brackets. The literal must supply two objects for every entry: one for the key, the other for the value. The key and value are normally separated by ​=>​.

For example, you could use a hash to map musical instruments to their orchestral sections.
```ruby
inst_section = {
  ​'cello'​     => ​'string'​,
  ​'clarinet'​  => ​'woodwind'​,​ 	
  ​'drum'​      => ​'percussion'​,​ 	
  ​'oboe'​      => ​'woodwind'​,​ 	
  ​'trumpet'​   => ​'brass'​,​ 	
  ​'violin'​    => ​'string'​​ 	
}
```
The thing to the left of the ​=>​ is the key, and the thing to the right is the corresponding value. Keys in a particular hash must be unique; you can’t have two entries for “drum.” The keys and values in a hash can be arbitrary objects. You can have hashes where the values are arrays, other hashes, and so on.

Hashes are indexed using the same square bracket notation as arrays. In this code, we’ll use the ​p​ method to write the values to the console. This works like ​puts​ but displays values such as ​nil​ explicitly.
```ruby
p inst_section[​'oboe'​]​ 	
p inst_section[​'cello'​]​ 	
p inst_section[​'bassoon'​]
```
Produces:
```ruby
"woodwind"
"string"
​nil
```
As the previous example shows, a hash by default returns ​nil​ when indexed by a key it doesn’t contain. Normally this is convenient, because ​nil​ means false when used in conditional expressions. Sometimes you’ll want to change this default. For example, if you’re using a hash to count the number of times each different word occurs in a file, it’s convenient to have the default value be zero. Then you can use the word as the key and simply increment the corresponding hash value without worrying about whether you’ve seen that word before. This is easily done by specifying a default value when you create a new, empty hash. (Have a look at the full source for the word frequency counter.)
```ruby
histogram = Hash.new(0)    ​# The default value is zero​
histogram[​'ruby'​] ​# => 0​ 	
histogram[​'ruby'​] = histogram[​'ruby'​] + 1
histogram[​'ruby'​] ​# => 1​
```
Array and hash objects have many useful methods; see the discussion, as well as the reference sections for arrays and for hashes.








