2.7 Blocks and Iterators
====
This section briefly describes one of Ruby’s particular strengths. We’re about to look at ​ code blocks​ , which are chunks of code you can associate with method invocations, almost as if they were parameters. This is an incredibly powerful feature. One of our reviewers commented at this point: “This is pretty interesting and important, so if you weren’t paying attention before, you should probably start now.” We’d have to agree.

You can use code blocks to implement callbacks (but they’re simpler than Java’s anonymous inner classes), to pass around chunks of code (but they’re more flexible than C’s function pointers), and to implement iterators.

Code blocks are just chunks of code between braces or between ​do​ and ​end​. This is a code block:
```ruby
{ puts ​"Hello"​ }
```
This is also a code block:
```
​do​​	
  club.enroll(person)​ 	
  person.socialize​ 	
​end​
```
Why are there two kinds of delimiter? It’s partly because sometimes one feels more natural to write than another. It’s partly too because they have different precedences: the braces bind more tightly than the ​do​/​end​ pairs. In this book, we try to follow what is becoming a Ruby standard and use braces for single-line blocks and ​do​/​end​ for multiline blocks.

All you can do with a block is associate it with a call to a method. You do this by putting the start of the block at the end of the source line containing the method call.
source line containing the method call.

For example, in the following code, the block containing ​puts "Hi"​ is associated with the call to the method ​greet​ (which we don’t show):
```ruby
greet  { puts ​"Hi"​ }
```
If the method has parameters, they appear before the block:
```ruby
verbose_greet(​"Dave"​, ​"loyal customer"​)  { puts ​"Hi"​ }
```
A method can then invoke an associated block one or more times using the Ruby ​yield​ statement. You can think of ​yield​ as being something like a method call that invokes the block associated with the call to the method containing the ​yield​.

The following example shows this in action. We define a method that calls ​yield​ twice. We then call this method, putting a block on the same line, after the call (and after any arguments to the method).[18]
```ruby
​def​ call_block​ 	
  puts ​"Start of method"​​ 	
  ​yield​​ 	
  ​yield​​ 	
  puts ​"End of method"​​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
call_block { puts ​"In the block"​ }
```
Produces:
```ruby
Start of method​ 	
In the block​ 	
In the block​ 	
End of method
```
The code in the block (​puts "In the block"​) is executed twice, once for each call to ​yield​.

You can provide arguments to the call to ​yield​, and they will be passed to the block. Within the block, you list the names of the parameters to receive these arguments between vertical bars (​|params...|​). The following example shows a method calling its associated block twice, passing the block two arguments each time:
```ruby
​def​ who_says_what​ 	
  ​yield​(​"Dave"​, ​"hello"​)​ 	
  ​yield​(​"Andy"​, ​"goodbye"​)​ 	
​end​ 	
who_says_what {|person, phrase| puts ​"​#{person}​ says ​#{phrase}​"​}
```
Produces:
```ruby
Dave says hello
Andy says goodbye
```
Code blocks are used throughout the Ruby library to implement ​ iterators​ , which are methods that return successive elements from some kind of collection, such as an array:
```ruby
animals = ​%w( ant bee cat dog )​    ​# create an array​
animals.each {|animal| puts animal }   ​# iterate over the contents​
```
Produces:
```ruby	
ant
bee
cat​ 	
dog
```
Many of the looping constructs that are built into languages such as C and Java are simply method calls in Ruby, with the methods invoking the associated block zero or more times:
```ruby
[ ​'cat'​, ​'dog'​, ​'horse'​ ].each {|name| print name, ​" "​ }​ 	
5.times {  print ​"*"​ }​ 	
3.upto(6) {|i|  print i }​ 	
(​'a'​..​'e'​).each {|char| print char }​ 	
puts
```
Produces:
```ruby
cat dog horse *****3456abcde
```
Here we ask an array to call the block once for each of its elements. Then, object 5 calls a block five times. Rather than use ​for​ loops, in Ruby we can ask the number 3 to call a block, passing in successive values until it reaches 6. Finally, the range of characters from ​a​ to ​e​ invokes a block using the method ​`each`​.