3.2 Classes Working with Other Classes
====

Our original challenge was to read in data from multiple CSV files and produce various simple reports. So far, all we have is ​BookInStock​, a class that represents the data for one book.

During OO design, you identify external things and make them classes in your code. But there’s another source of classes in your designs. There are the classes that correspond to things inside your code itself. For example, we know that the program we’re writing will need to consolidate and summarize CSV data feeds. But that’s a very passive statement. Let’s turn it into a design by asking ourselves ​what​ does the summarizing and consolidating. And the answer (in our case) is a ​CSV reader​. Let’s make it into a class as follows:
```ruby 	
​class​ CsvReader​ 	
  ​def​ initialize​ 	
    ​# ...​​ 	
  ​end​
  
  ​def​ read_in_csv_data(csv_file_name)​ 	
    ​# ...​​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​ 	
  ​def​ total_value_in_stock​ 	
    ​# ...​​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​ 	
  ​def​ number_of_each_isbn​ 	
    ​# ...​​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
​end​
```
We’d call it using something like this:
```ruby
reader = CsvReader.new​ 	
reader.read_in_csv_data(​"file1.csv"​)​ 	
reader.read_in_csv_data(​"file2.csv"​)​ 	
    :         :              :​ 	
puts ​"Total value in stock = ​#{reader.total_value_in_stock}​"​
```
We need to be able to handle multiple CSV files, so our ​reader​ object needs to accumulate the values from each CSV file it is fed. We’ll do that by keeping an array of values in an instance variable. And how shall we represent each book’s data? Well, we just finished writing the ​BookInStock​ class, so that problem is solved. The only other question is how we parse data in a CSV file. Fortunately, Ruby comes with a good CSV library (which has a brief description). Given a CSV file with a header line, we can iterate over the remaining rows and extract values by name:
```ruby
tut_classes/stock_stats/csv_reader.rb
​ 	
​class​ CsvReader​ 	
  ​def​ initialize​ 	
    @books_in_stock = []​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ read_in_csv_data(csv_file_name)​ 	
    CSV.foreach(csv_file_name, headers: true) ​do​ |row|​ 	
      @books_in_stock << BookInStock.new(row[​"ISBN"​], row[​"Price"​])​ 	
    ​end​​ 	
  ​end​
  
​end​
```
Just because you’re probably wondering what’s going on, let’s dissect that ​read_in_csv_data​ method. On the first line, we tell the CSV library to open the file with the given name. The ​headers: true​ option tells the library to parse the first line of the file as the names of the columns.

The library then reads the rest of the file, passing each row in turn to the block (the code between ​do​ and ​end​).[21] Inside the block, we extract the data from the ISBN and Price columns and use that data to create a new ​BookInStock​ object. We then append that object to an instance variable called ​@books_in_stock​. And just where does that variable come from? It’s an array that we created in the ​initialize​ method.

Again, this is the pattern you want to aim for. Your ​initialize​ method sets up an environment for your object, leaving it in a usable state. Other methods then use that state.

So, let’s turn this from a code fragment into a working program. We’re going to organize our source into three files. The first, ​book_in_stock.rb​, will contain the definition of the class ​BookInStock​. The second, ​csv_reader.rb​, is the source for the ​CsvReader​ class. Finally, a third file, ​stock_stats.rb​, is the main driver program. We’ll start with ​book_in_stock.rb​:
```ruby
tut_classes/stock_stats/book_in_stock.rb
​ 	
​class​ BookInStock​ 	
  attr_reader :isbn, :price 	
​ 	
  ​def​ initialize(isbn, price)​ 	
    @isbn  = isbn​ 	
    @price = Float(price)​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
​end​
```
Here’s the ​csv_reader.rb​ file. The ​CsvReader​ class has two external dependencies: it needs the standard CSV library, and it needs the ​BookInStock​ class that’s in the file ​book_in_stock.rb​. Ruby has a couple of helper methods that let us load external files. In this file, we use ​require​ to load in the Ruby CSV library and ​require_relative​ to load in the ​book_in_stock​ file we wrote. (We use ​require_relative​ for this because the location of the file we’re loading is relative to the file we’re loading it from—they’re both in the same directory.)
```ruby
tut_classes/stock_stats/csv_reader.rb

require ​'csv'​ 	
require_relative ​'book_in_stock'​
​ 	
​class​ CsvReader​ 	
  ​def​ initialize​ 	
    @books_in_stock = []​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ read_in_csv_data(csv_file_name)​ 	
    CSV.foreach(csv_file_name, headers: true) ​do​ |row|​ 	
      @books_in_stock << BookInStock.new(row[​"ISBN"​], row[​"Price"​])​ 	
    ​end​​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ total_value_in_stock   ​# later we'll see how to use inject to sum a collection​​ 	
    sum = 0.0​ 	
    @books_in_stock.each {|book| sum += book.price}​ 	
    sum​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​ 	
  ​def​ number_of_each_isbn​ 	
    ​# ...​​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
​end​
```
And finally, here’s our main program, in the file ​stock_stats.rb​:
```ruby
tut_classes/stock_stats/stock_stats.rb
​ 	
require_relative ​'csv_reader'​​ 	
reader = CsvReader.new​ 	
​ 	
ARGV.each ​do​ |csv_file_name|​ 	
  STDERR.puts ​"Processing ​#{csv_file_name}​"​​ 	
  reader.read_in_csv_data(csv_file_name)​ 	
​end​
​ 	
puts ​"Total value = ​#{reader.total_value_in_stock}​"​
```
Again, this file uses ​require_relative​ to bring in the library it needs (in this case, the ​csv_reader.rb​ file). It uses the ​ARGV​ variable to access the program’s command-line arguments, loading CSV data for each file specified on the command line.

We can run this program using the simple CSV data file as we showed:
```ruby
$ ​ruby stock_stats.rb data.csv​

Processing data.csv
Total value = 122.07000000000001
```
Do we need three source files for this? No. In fact, most Ruby developers would probably start off by sticking all this code into a single file—it would contain both class definitions as well as the driver code. But as your programs grow (and almost all programs grow over time), you’ll find that this starts to get cumbersome. You’ll also find it harder to write automated tests against the code if it is in a monolithic chunk. Finally, you won’t be able to reuse classes if they’re all bundled into the final program.

Anyway, let’s get back to our discussion of classes.