4.1 Arrays
The class ​Array​ holds a collection of object references. Each object reference occupies a position in the array, identified by a non-negative integer index.

You can create arrays by using literals or by explicitly creating an ​Array​ object. A literal array is simply a list of objects between square brackets.[23]
```ruby
a = [ 3.14159, ​"pie"​, 99 ]​ 	
a.class   ​# => Array​​ 	
a.length  ​# => 3​
a[0]      ​# => 3.14159​ 	
a[1]      ​# => "pie"​​ 	
a[2]      ​# => 99​​ 	
a[3]      ​# => nil
​ 	
b = Array.new​ 	
b.class   ​# => Array​​ 	
b.length  ​# => 0​
b[0] = ​"second"​ 	
b[1] = ​"array"​
b         ​# => ["second", "array"]​
```
Arrays are indexed using the ​[ ]​ operator. As with most Ruby operators, this is actually a method (an instance method of class ​Array​) and hence can be overridden in subclasses. As the example shows, array indices start at zero. Index an array with a non-negative integer, and it returns the object at that position or returns ​nil​ if nothing is there. Index an array with a negative integer, and it counts from the end.
```ruby
a = [ 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 ]​ 	
a[-1]     ​# => 9​​ 	
a[-2]     ​# => 7​​ 	
a[-99]    ​# => nil
```​
The following diagram shows this a different way.

You can also index arrays with a pair of numbers, ​[​start,count​]​. This returns a new array consisting of references to ​count​ objects starting at position ​start​:
```ruby
a = [ 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 ]​ 	
a[1, 3]   ​# => [3, 5, 7]​ 	
a[3, 1]   ​# => [7]​​ 	
a[-3, 2]  ​# => [5, 7]​
```
Finally, you can index arrays using ranges, in which start and end positions are separated by two or three periods. The two-period form includes the end position; the three-period form does not:
```ruby
a = [ 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 ]​ 	
a[1..3]   ​# => [3, 5, 7]​​ 	
a[1...3]  ​# => [3, 5]​​ 	
a[3..3]   ​# => [7]​​ 	
a[-3..-1] ​# => [5, 7, 9]​
```
The ​[ ]​ operator has a corresponding ​[ ]=​ operator, which lets you set elements in the array. If used with a single integer index, the element at that position is replaced by whatever is on the right side of the assignment. Any gaps that result will be filled with ​nil​:
```ruby
a = [ 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 ]     ​#=> [1, 3, 5, 7, 9]​​ 	
a[1] = ​'bat'​              ​#=> [1, "bat", 5, 7, 9]​​ 	
a[-3] = ​'cat'​             ​#=> [1, "bat", "cat", 7, 9]​​ 	
a[3]  = [ 9, 8 ]          ​#=> [1, "bat", "cat", [9, 8], 9]​​ 	
a[6]  = 99                ​#=> [1, "bat", "cat", [9, 8], 9, nil, 99]
```​
If the index to ​[ ]=​ is two numbers (a start and a length) or a range, then those elements in the original array are replaced by whatever is on the right side of the assignment. If the length is zero, the right side is inserted into the array before the start position; no elements are removed. If the right side is itself an array, its elements are used in the replacement. The array size is automatically adjusted if the index selects a different number of elements than are available on the right side of the assignment.
```ruby
a = [ 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 ]     ​#=> [1, 3, 5, 7, 9]​​ 	
a[2, 2] = ​'cat'​           ​#=> [1, 3, "cat", 9]​ 	
a[2, 0] = ​'dog'​           ​#=> [1, 3, "dog", "cat", 9]​​ 	
a[1, 1] = [ 9, 8,  7 ]    ​#=> [1, 9, 8, 7, "dog", "cat", 9]​​ 	
a[0..3] = []              ​#=> ["dog", "cat", 9]​​ 	
a[5..6] = 99, 98          ​#=> ["dog", "cat", 9, nil, nil, 99, 98]​
```
Arrays have a large number of other useful methods. Using them, you can treat arrays as stacks, sets, queues, dequeues, and FIFO queues.

For example, ​push​ and ​pop​ add and remove elements from the end of an array, so you can use the array as a stack:
```ruby
stack = []​ 	
stack.push ​"red"​​ 	
stack.push ​"green"​ 	
stack.push ​"blue"​​ 	
stack     ​# => ["red", "green", "blue"]​
​	
stack.pop ​# => "blue"​​ 	
stack.pop ​# => "green"​ 	
stack.pop ​# => "red"​​ 	
stack     ​# => []​
```
Similarly, ​unshift​ and ​shift​ add and remove elements from the head of an array. Combine ​shift​ and ​push​ , and you have a first-in first-out (FIFO) queue.
```ruby
queue = []​ 	
queue.push ​"red"​​ 	
queue.push ​"green"​ 	
queue.shift ​# => "red"​​ 	
queue.shift ​# => "green"
```​
The ​first​ and ​last​ methods return (but don’t remove) the ​n​ entries at the head or end of an array.
```ruby
array = [ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 ]​ 	
array.first(4) ​# => [1, 2, 3, 4]​ 	
array.last(4)  ​# => [4, 5, 6, 7]​
```
The reference section lists the methods in class ​Array​. It is well worth firing up irb and playing with them.