4.4集合无处不在(Containers Everywhere)
====
Containers, blocks, and iterators are core concepts in Ruby. The more you write in Ruby, the more you’ll find yourself moving away from conventional looping constructs. Instead, you’ll write classes that support iteration over their contents. And you’ll find that this code is compact, easy to read, and a joy to maintain. If this all seems too weird, don’t worry. After a while, it’ll start to come naturally. And you’ll have plenty of time to practice as you use Ruby libraries and frameworks.

Ruby中，集合、语句块和迭代器是核心内容。你写的Ruby越多，你用传统意义上的循环结构就越少。相反，你会写更多支持迭代内容的类，并且你会发现代码简洁易读且易于维护。如果这些看似不可思议，不要担心。过一会，你就会习惯了。并且在你用Ruby的类库和框架的时候，有足够的时间来练习。

Footnotes
[22]	
Some languages call hashes ​associative arrays​ or ​dictionaries​.

[23]	
In the code examples that follow, we’re often going to show the value of expressions such as ​a[0]​ in a comment at the end of the line. If you simply typed this fragment of code into a file and executed it using Ruby, you’d see no output—you’d need to add something like a call to ​puts​ to have the values written to the console.

[24]	
Programming-language buffs will be pleased to know that the keyword ​yield​ was chosen to echo the ​yield​ function in Liskov’s language CLU, a language that is more than thirty years old and yet contains features that still haven’t been widely exploited by the CLU-less.

[25]	
The basic Fibonacci series is a sequence of integers, starting with two 1s, in which each subsequent term is the sum of the two preceding terms. The series is sometimes used in sorting algorithms and in analyzing natural phenomena.

[26]	
The ​find​ method is actually defined in module ​Enumerable​, which is mixed into class ​Array​.

[27]	
You can also handle this in your own iterator methods by rescuing the ​StopIteration​ exception, but because we haven’t talked about exceptions yet, we won’t go into details here.

[28]	
It would be nice to be able to define a true block-local variable using the semicolon separator, but Ruby doesn’t allow these variables to have initializers.