5.5 Composing Modules
=====
Enumerable​ is a standard mixin, implementing a bunch of methods in terms of the host class’s ​each​ method. One of the methods defined by ​Enumerable​ is ​inject​ , which we saw previously. This method applies a function or operation to the first two elements in the collection and then applies the operation to the result of this computation and to the third element, and so on, until all elements in the collection have been used.

Because ​inject​ is made available by ​Enumerable​, we can use it in any class that includes the ​Enumerable​ module and defines the method ​each​ . Many built-in classes do this.
```ruby
[ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 ].inject(:+) ​# => 15​​ 	
( ​'a'​..​'m'​).inject(:+)       ​# => "abcdefghijklm"​
```
We could also define our own class that mixes in ​Enumerable​ and hence gets ​inject​ support:
```ruby
tut_modules/vowel_finder.rb
​ 	
​class​ VowelFinder​ 	
  include Enumerable​ 	
​ 	
  ​def​ initialize(string)​ 	
    @string = string​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ each​ 	
    @string.scan(/[aeiou]/) ​do​ |vowel|​ 	
      ​yield​ vowel​ 	
    ​end​​ 	
  ​end​
​end​​

vf = VowelFinder.new(​"the quick brown fox jumped"​)​ 	
vf.inject(:+)                    ​# => "euiooue"​
```
Note we used the same pattern in the call to ​inject​ in these examples—we’re using it to perform a summation. When applied to numbers, it returns the arithmetic sum; when applied to strings, it concatenates them. We can use a module to encapsulate this functionality too:
```ruby
​module​ Summable​ 	
  ​def​ sum​ 	
    inject(:+)​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
​class​ Array
​ 	include Summable
​end​
​ 	
​class​ Range​ 	
  include Summable​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
require_relative ​"vowel_finder"​​ 	
​
class​ VowelFinder​ 	
  include Summable​ 	
​end​
​
[ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 ].sum  ​# => 15​​ 	
(​'a'​..​'m'​).sum         ​# => "abcdefghijklm"​​ 	
​ 	
vf = VowelFinder.new(​"the quick brown fox jumped"​)​ 	
vf.sum                 ​# => "euiooue"​
```
###Instance Variables in Mixins
People coming to Ruby from C++ often ask, “What happens to instance variables in a mixin? In C++, I have to jump through some hoops to control how variables are shared in a multiple-inheritance hierarchy. How does Ruby handle this?”

Well, for starters, it’s not really a fair question. Remember how instance variables work in Ruby: the first mention of an ​@​-prefixed variable creates the instance variable ​in the current object​, ​self​.

For a mixin, this means the module you mix into your client class (the ​mixee​?) may create instance variables in the client object and may use ​attr_reader​ and friends to define accessors for these instance variables. For instance, the ​Observable​ module in the following example adds an instance variable ​@observer_list​ to any class that includes it:
```ruby
tut_modules/observer_impl.rb
​ 	
​module​ Observable​ 	
  ​def​ observers​ 	
    @observer_list ||= []​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ add_observer(obj)​ 	
    observers << obj​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ notify_observers​ 	
    observers.each {|o| o.update }​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​
```
However, this behavior exposes us to a risk. A mixin’s instance variables can clash with those of the host class or with those of other mixins. The example that follows shows a class that uses our ​Observer​ module but that unluckily also uses an instance variable called ​@observer_list​. At runtime, this program will go wrong in some hard-to-diagnose ways:
```ruby
tut_modules/observer_impl_eg.rb
​ 	
require_relative ​'observer_impl'​​ 	
​ 	
​class​ TelescopeScheduler​ 	
  ​# other classes can register to get notifications​
​ 	​# when the schedule changes​
​ 	
  include Observable​ 	
​ 	
  ​def​ initialize​ 	
    @observer_list = []  ​# folks with telescope time​​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ add_viewer(viewer)​ 	
    @observer_list << viewer​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
  ​# ...​
​​end​
```
For the most part, mixin modules don’t use instance variables directly—they use accessors to retrieve data from the client object. But if you need to create a mixin that has to have its own state, ensure that the instance variables have unique names to distinguish them from any other mixins in the system (perhaps by using the module’s name as part of the variable name). Alternatively, the module could use a module-level hash, indexed by the current object ID, to store instance-specific data without using Ruby instance variables:
```ruby
​module​ Test​ 	
  State = {}​ 	
  ​def​ state=(value)​ 	
    State[object_id] = value​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​ 	
  ​def​ state​ 	
    State[object_id]​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​
​ 	
​class​ Client​ 	
  include Test​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
c1 = Client.new​ 	
c2 = Client.new​ 	
c1.state = ​'cat'​
​c2.state = ​'dog'​
​c1.state  ​# => "cat"​​ 	
c2.state  ​# => "dog"​
```
A downside of this approach is that the data associated with a particular object will not get automatically deleted if the object is deleted. In general, a mixin that requires its own state is not a mixin—it should be written as a class.

###Resolving Ambiguous Method Names
One of the other questions folks ask about mixins is, how is method lookup handled? In particular, what happens if methods with the same name are defined in a class, in that class’s parent class, and in a mixin included into the class?

The answer is that Ruby looks first in the immediate class of an object, then in the mixins included into that class, and then in superclasses and their mixins. If a class has multiple modules mixed in, the last one included is searched first.