6.2 Strings
====
Ruby strings are simply sequences of characters.[39] They normally hold printable characters, but that is not a requirement; a string can also hold binary data. Strings are objects of class ​String​. Strings are often created using string literals—sequences of characters between delimiters. Because binary data is otherwise difficult to represent within program source, you can place various escape sequences in a string literal. Each is replaced with the corresponding binary value as the program is compiled. The type of string delimiter determines the degree of substitution performed. Within single-quoted strings, two consecutive backslashes are replaced by a single backslash, and a backslash followed by a single quote becomes a single quote.
```ruby
​'escape using "\\"'​   ​# => escape using "\"​​ 	
​'That\'s right'​       ​# => That's right​
```
Double-quoted strings support a boatload more escape sequences. The most common is probably ​\n​, the newline character. For a complete list, see Table 11, ​Substitutions in double-quoted strings​. In addition, you can substitute the value of any Ruby code into a string using the sequence ​#{​ ​expr​ ​}​. If the code is just a global variable, a class variable, or an instance variable, you can omit the braces.
```ruby
​"Seconds/day: ​#{24*60*60}​"​      ​# => Seconds/day: 86400​​ 	
​"​#{​'Ho! '​*3}​Merry Christmas!"​   ​# => Ho! Ho! Ho! Merry Christmas!​​ 	
​"Safe level is ​#$SAFE​"​          ​# => Safe level is 0​
```
The interpolated code can be one or more statements, not just an expression:
```ruby
puts  ​"now is ​#{ ​def​ the(a)​ 	
                    ​'the '​ + a​ 	
                  ​end​​ 	
                  the(​'time'​)​ 	
                }​ for all bad coders..."​
```
Produces:
```ruby
now is the time for all bad coders...
```
You have three more ways to construct string literals: ​%q​, ​%Q​, and ​here documents​. ​ %q​ and ​%Q​ start delimited single- and double-quoted strings (you can think of ​%q​ as a thin quote, as in ​’​, and ​%Q​ as a thick quote, as in ​"​):
```ruby
​%q/general single-quoted string/​   ​# => general single-quoted string​​ 	
​%Q!general double-quoted string!​   ​# => general double-quoted string​​ 	
​%Q{Seconds/day: ​#{24*60*60}​}​       ​# => Seconds/day: 86400​
```
In fact, the ​Q​ is optional:
```ruby
​%!general double-quoted string!​   ​# => general double-quoted string​​ 	
​%{Seconds/day: ​#{24*60*60}​}​       ​# => Seconds/day: 86400​
```
The character following the ​q​ or ​Q​ is the delimiter. If it is an opening bracket ​[​, brace ​{​, parenthesis ​(​, or less-than sign ​<​, the string is read until the matching close symbol is found. Otherwise, the string is read until the next occurrence of the same delimiter. The delimiter can be any nonalphanumeric or nonmultibyte character.

Finally, you can construct a string using a ​ here document​ :
```ruby
string = ​<<END_OF_STRING​​ 	
​    The body of the string is the input lines up to​​ 	
​    one starting with the same text that followed the '<<'​​ 	
​END_OF_STRING​
```
A here document consists of lines in the source up to but not including the terminating string that you specify after the ​<<​ characters. Normally, this terminator must start in column one. However, if you put a minus sign after the ​<<​ characters, you can indent the terminator:
```ruby
string = ​<<-END_OF_STRING​​ 	
​    The body of the string is the input lines up to​​ 	
​    one starting with the same text that followed the '<<'​​ 	
​    END_OF_STRING​
```
You can also have multiple here documents on a single line. Each acts as a separate string. The bodies of the here documents are fetched sequentially from the source lines that follow:
```ruby
print ​<<-STRING1​, ​<<-STRING2​​ 	
​Concat​​ 	
​STRING1​​ 	
​      enate​​ 	
​      STRING2
```
Produces:
```ruby
Concat​ 	
      enate
```
Note that Ruby does not strip leading spaces off the contents of the strings in these cases.

###Strings and Encodings
Every string has an associated encoding. The default encoding of a string literal depends on the encoding of the source file that contains it. With no explicit encoding, a source file (and its strings) will be US-ASCII in Ruby 1.9 and UTF-8«2.0» in Ruby 2.
```ruby
plain_string = ​"dog"​​ 	
puts RUBY_VERSION​ 	
puts ​"Encoding of ​#{plain_string.inspect}​ is ​#{plain_string.encoding}​"​
```
Produces:
```ruby
2.0.0
Encoding of "dog" is UTF-8
```
If you override the encoding, you’ll do that for all strings in the file:
```ruby
​#encoding: utf-8​​ 	
plain_string = ​"dog"​​ 	
puts ​"Encoding of ​#{plain_string.inspect}​ is ​#{plain_string.encoding}​"​​ 	
utf_string = ​"δog"​​ 	
puts ​"Encoding of ​#{utf_string.inspect}​ is ​#{utf_string.encoding}​"​
```
Produces:
```ruby
Encoding of "dog" is UTF-8​ 	
Encoding of "δog" is UTF-8
```
We’ll have a lot more to say about encoding in Chapter 17, ​Character Encoding​.

###Character Constants
Technically, Ruby does not have a class for characters—characters are simply strings of length one. For historical reasons, character constants can be created by preceding the character (or sequence that represents a character) with a question mark:
```ruby
?a         ​# => "a"     (printable character)​
​ 	
?\n        ​# => "\n"    (code for a newline (0x0a))​
​ 	
?\C-a      ​# => "\u0001"  (control a)​
​ 	
?\M-a      ​# => "\xE1"  (meta sets bit 7)​
​ 	
?\M-\C-a   ​# => "\x81"  (meta and control a)​
​ 	
?\C-?      ​# => "\u007F"  (delete character)​
```
Do yourself a favor and forget this section. It’s far easier to use regular octal and hex escape sequences than to remember these ones. Use ​"a"​ rather than ​?a​, and use ​"\n"​ rather than ​?\n​.

###Working with Strings
​String​ is probably the largest built-in Ruby class, with more than one hundred standard methods. We won’t go through them all here; the library reference has a complete list. Instead, we’ll look at some common string idioms—things that are likely to pop up during day-to-day programming.

Maybe we’ve been given a file containing information on a song playlist. For historical reasons (are there any other kind?), the list of songs is stored as lines in the file. Each line holds the name of the file containing the song, the song’s duration, the artist, and the title, all in vertical bar--separated fields. A typical file may start like this:
```ruby
tut_stdtypes/songdata
​ 	
/jazz/j00132.mp3  | 3:45 | Fats     Waller     | Ain't Misbehavin'​ 	
/jazz/j00319.mp3  | 2:58 | Louis    Armstrong  | Wonderful World​ 	
/bgrass/bg0732.mp3| 4:09 | Strength in Numbers | Texas Red
```
Looking at the data, it’s clear that we’ll be using some of class ​String​’s many methods to extract and clean up the fields before we use them. At a minimum, we’ll need to

1.break each line into fields,

2.convert the running times from mm:ss to seconds, and

3.remove those extra spaces from the artists’ names.

Our first task is to split each line into fields, and ​String#split​ will do the job nicely. In this case, we’ll pass ​split​ a regular expression, ​/\s*\|\s*/​, that splits the line into tokens wherever ​split​ finds a vertical bar, optionally surrounded by spaces. And, because the line read from the file has a trailing newline, we’ll use ​String#chomp​ to strip it off just before we apply the split. We’ll store details of each song in a ​Struct​ that contains an attribute for each of the three fields. (A ​Struct​ is simply a data structure that contains a given set of attributes—in this case the title, name, and length. ​Struct​ is described in the reference section.)
```ruby
Song = Struct.new(:title, :name, :length) 	
​ 	
File.open(​"songdata"​) ​do​ |song_file|​ 	
  songs = []​​ 	
  song_file.each ​do​ |line|​ 	
    file, length, name, title = line.chomp.split(/​\s​*​\|\s​*/)​ 	
    songs << Song.new(title, name, length)​ 	
  ​end​	
​ 	
  puts songs[1]​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
#<struct Song title="Wonderful World", name="Louis    Armstrong", length="2:58">
```
Unfortunately, whoever created the original file entered the artists’ names in columns, so some of them contain extra spaces that we’d better remove before we go much further. We have many ways of doing this, but probably the simplest is ​String#squeeze​ , which trims runs of repeated characters. We’ll use the ​squeeze!​ form of the method, which alters the string in place:
```ruby
Song = Struct.new(:title, :name, :length)​ 	
​ 	
File.open(​"songdata"​) ​do​ |song_file|​ 	
  songs = []​ 	
  song_file.each ​do​ |line|​ 	
    file, length, name, title = line.chomp.split(/​\s​*​\|\s​*/)​ 	
    name.squeeze!(​" "​)​ 	
    songs << Song.new(title, name, length)​ 	
  ​end​ 	
​ 	
  puts songs[1]​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
#<struct Song title="Wonderful World", name="Louis Armstrong", length="2:58">
```
Finally, we have the minor matter of the time format: the file says 2:58, and we want the number of seconds, 178. We could use ​split​ again, this time splitting the time field around the colon character:
```ruby
​"2:58"​.split(/:/) ​# => ["2", "58"]​
```
Instead, we’ll use a related method. ​String#scan​ is similar to ​split​ in that it breaks a string into chunks based on a pattern. However, unlike ​split​ , with ​scan​ you specify the pattern that you want the chunks to match. In this case, we want to match one or more digits for both the minutes and seconds components. The pattern for one or more digits is ​/\d+/​:
```ruby
Song = Struct.new(:title, :name, :length)​ 	
​ 	
File.open(​"songdata"​) ​do​ |song_file|​ 	
  songs = []​ 	
  song_file.each ​do​ |line|​ 	
    file, length, name, title = line.chomp.split(/​\s​*​\|\s​*/)​ 	
    name.squeeze!(​" "​)​ 	
    mins, secs = length.scan(/​\d​+/)​ 	
    songs << Song.new(title, name, mins.to_i*60 + secs.to_i)​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​ 	
  puts songs[1]​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
#<struct Song title="Wonderful World", name="Louis Armstrong", length=178>
```
We could spend the next fifty pages looking at all the methods in class ​String​. However, let’s move on instead to look at a simpler data type: the range.