6.3 Ranges
====
Ranges occur everywhere: January to December, 0 to 9, rare to well done, lines 50 through 67, and so on. If Ruby is to help us model reality, it seems natural for it to support these ranges. In fact, Ruby goes one better: it actually uses ranges to implement three separate features: sequences, conditions, and intervals.

###Ranges as Sequences
The first and perhaps most natural use of ranges is to express a sequence. Sequences have a start point, an end point, and a way to produce successive values in the sequence. In Ruby, these sequences are created using the ​..​ and ​...​ range operators. The two-dot form creates an inclusive range, and the three-dot form creates a range that excludes the specified high value:
```ruby
1..10​ 	
​'a'​..​'z'​​ 	
0...​"cat"​.length
```
You can convert a range to an array using the ​to_a​ method and convert it to an ​Enumerator​ using ​to_enum​ :[40]
```ruby
(1..10).to_a        ​# => [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]​​ 	
(​'bar'​..​'bat'​).to_a ​# => ["bar", "bas", "bat"]​​ 	
enum = (​'bar'​..​'bat'​).to_enum​ 	
enum.next           ​# => "bar"​​ 	
enum.next           ​# => "bas"​
```
Ranges have methods that let you iterate over them and test their contents in a variety of ways:
```ruby
digits = 0..9​ 	
digits.include?(5)         ​# => true​​ 	
digits.max                 ​# => 9​​ 	
digits.reject {|i| i < 5 } ​# => [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]​​ 	
digits.inject(:+)          ​# => 45​
```
So far we’ve shown ranges of numbers and strings. However, as you’d expect from an object-oriented language, Ruby ranges can be based on objects that you define. The only constraints are that the objects must respond to ​succ​ by returning the next object in sequence and the objects must be comparable using ​<=>​. Sometimes called the ​ spaceship operator​ , ​<=>​ compares two values, returning -1, 0, or +1 depending on whether the first is less than, equal to, or greater than the second.

In reality, this isn’t something you do very often, so examples tend to be a bit contrived. Here’s one—a class that presents numbers that are powers of 2. Because it defines ​<=>​ and ​succ​ , we can use objects of this class in ranges:
```ruby
​class​ PowerOfTwo​ 	
  attr_reader :value
​ 	
  ​def​ initialize(value)​ 	
    @value = value​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ <=>(other)​ 	
    @value <=> other.value​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ succ​ 	
    PowerOfTwo.new(@value + @value)​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ to_s​ 	
    @value.to_s​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​
​ 	 	
p1 = PowerOfTwo.new(4)​ 	
p2 = PowerOfTwo.new(32)​ 	
​ 	
puts (p1..p2).to_a
```
Produces:
```ruby
4​ 	
8​ 	
16​ 	
32
```
###Ranges as Conditions
As well as representing sequences, ranges can also be used as conditional expressions. Here, they act as a kind of toggle switch—they turn on when the condition in the first part of the range becomes true, and they turn off when the condition in the second part becomes true. For example, the following code fragment prints sets of lines from standard input, where the first line in each set contains the word ​start​ and the last line contains the word ​end​:
```ruby
​while​ line = gets​ 	
  puts line ​if​ line =~ /start/ .. line =~ /end/​ 	
​end​
```
Behind the scenes, the range keeps track of the state of each of the tests. We’ll show some examples of this in the description of loops and in the .language section.

###Ranges as Intervals
A final use of the versatile range is as an interval test: seeing whether some value falls within the interval represented by the range. We do this using ​===​, the case equality operator:
```ruby
(1..10)    === 5       ​# => true​​ 	
(1..10)    === 15      ​# => false​​ 	
(1..10)    === 3.14159 ​# => true​​ 	
(​'a'​..​'j'​) === ​'c'​     ​# => true​​ 	
(​'a'​..​'j'​) === ​'z'​     ​# => false
```​
This is most often used in ​case​ statements:
```ruby
car_age = gets.to_f    ​# let's assume it's 9.5​​ 	
​case​ car_age​ 	
​when​ 0...1​ 	
  puts ​"Mmm.. new car smell"​​ 	
​when​ 1...3​ 	
  puts ​"Nice and new"​​ 	
​when​ 3...10​ 	
  puts ​"Reliable but slightly dinged"​​ 	
​when​ 10...30​ 	
  puts ​"Clunker"​​ 	
​else​​ 	
  puts ​"Vintage gem"​​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
Reliable but slightly dinged
```
Note the use of exclusive ranges in the previous example. These are normally the correct choice in ​case​ statements. If instead we had written the following, we’d get the wrong answer because 9.5 does not fall within any of the ranges, so the ​else​ clause triggers:
```ruby
car_age = gets.to_f    ​# let's assume it's 9.5​​ 	
​case​ car_age​ 	
​when​ 0..0​ 	
  puts ​"Mmm.. new car smell"​​ 	
​when​ 1..2​ 	
  puts ​"Nice and new"​​ 	
​when​ 3..9​ 	
  puts ​"Reliable but slightly dinged"​​ 	
​when​ 10..29​ 	
  puts ​"Clunker"​​ 	
​else​​ 	
  puts ​"Vintage gem"​​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
Vintage gem
```
Footnotes
[39]	
Prior to Ruby 1.9, strings were sequences of 8-bit bytes.

[40]	
Sometimes people worry that ranges take a lot of memory. That’s not an issue: the range 1..100000 is held as a ​Range​ object containing references to two ​Fixnum​ objects. However, convert a range into an array, and all that memory will get used.