4.3 Blocks and Iterators
====
In our program that wrote out the results of our word frequency analysis, we had the following loop:
```ruby
​for​ i ​in​ 0..4​ 	
  word = top_five[i][0]​ 	
  count = top_five[i][1]​ 	
  puts ​"​#{word}​:  ​#{count}​"​ 	
​end​
```
This works, and it looks comfortingly familiar: a ​for​ loop iterating over an array. What could be more natural?

It turns out there ​is​ something more natural. In a way, our ​for​ loop is somewhat too intimate with the array; it magically knows that we’re iterating over five elements, and it retrieves values in turn from the array. To do this, it has to know that the structure it is working with is an array of two-element subarrays. This is a whole lot of coupling.

Instead, we could write this code like this:
```ruby
top_five.each ​do​ |word, count|​ 	
  puts ​"​#{word}​:  ​#{count}​"​​ 	
​end​
```
The method ​each​ is an ​ iterator​ —a method that invokes a block of code repeatedly. In fact, some Ruby programmers might write this more compactly as this:
```ruby
puts top_five.map { |word, count| ​"​#{word}​:  ​#{count}​"​ }
```
Just how far you take this is a matter of taste. However you use them, iterators and code blocks are among the more interesting features of Ruby, so let’s spend a while looking into them.

###Blocks
A ​ block​ is simply a chunk of code enclosed between either braces or the keywords ​do​ and ​end​. The two forms are identical except for precedence, which we’ll see in a minute. All things being equal, the current Ruby style seems to favor using braces for blocks that fit on one line and ​do​/​end​ when a block spans multiple lines:
```ruby
some_array.each {|value| puts value * 3 }

sum = 0
​ 	
other_array.each ​do​ |value|​ 	
  sum += value​ 	
  puts value / sum​ 	
​end​
```
You can think of a block as being somewhat like the body of an anonymous method. Just like a method, the block can take parameters (but, unlike a method, those parameters appear at the start of the block between vertical bars). Both the blocks in the preceding example take a single parameter, ​value​. And, just like a method, the body of a block is not executed when Ruby first sees it. Instead, the block is saved away to be called later.

Blocks can appear in Ruby source code only immediately after the ​invocation​ of some method. If the method takes parameters, the block appears after these parameters. In a way, you can almost think of the block as being one extra parameter, passed to that method. Let’s look at a simple example that sums the squares of the numbers in an array:
```ruby
sum = 0​ 	
[1, 2, 3, 4].each ​do​ |value|​ 	
  square = value * value​ 	
  sum   += square​ 	
​end​
​ 	
puts sum
```
Produces:
```ruby
30
```
The block is being called by the ​each​ method once for each element in the array. The element is passed to the block as the ​value​ parameter. But there’s something subtle going on, too. Take a look at the ​sum​ variable. It’s declared outside the block, updated inside the block, and then passed to ​puts​ after the ​each​ method returns.

This illustrates an important rule: if there’s a variable inside a block with the same name as a variable in the same scope outside the block, the two are the same—there’s only one variable ​sum​ in the preceding program. (You can override this behavior, as we’ll see later.)

If, however, a variable appears only inside a block, then that variable is local to the block—in the preceding program, we couldn’t have written the value of ​square​ at the end of the code, because ​square​ is not defined at that point. It is defined only inside the block itself.

Although simple, this behavior can lead to unexpected problems. For example, say our program was dealing with drawing different shapes. We might have this:
```ruby
square = Shape.new(sides: 4) ​# assume Shape defined elsewhere​
​# .. lots of code​​ 	
sum = 0	
[1, 2, 3, 4].each ​do​ |value|​ 	
  square = value * value​ 	
  sum   += square​ 	
​end​​ 	
puts sum
​ 	
square.draw   ​# BOOM!​
```
This code would fail, because the variable ​square​, which originally held a ​Shape​ object, will have been overwritten inside the block and will hold a number by the time the ​each​ method returns. This problem doesn’t bite often, but when it does, it can be very confusing.

Fortunately, Ruby has a couple of answers.

First, parameters to a block are ​always​ local to a block, even if they have the same name as locals in the surrounding scope. (You’ll get a warning message if you run Ruby with the ​-w​ option.)
```ruby
value = ​"some shape"​​ 	
[ 1, 2 ].each {|value| puts value }​ 	
puts value
```
Produces:
```ruby
1 	
2
​some shape
```
Second, you can define block-local variables by putting them after a semicolon in the block’s parameter list. So, in our sum-of-squares example, we should have indicated that the ​square​ variable was block-local by writing it as follows:
```ruby
square = ​"some shape"​
sum = 0​ 	
[1, 2, 3, 4].each ​do​ |value; square|​ 	
  square = value * value    ​# this is a different variable​​ 	
  sum   += square​ 	
​end​

puts sum​ 	
puts square
```
Produces:
```ruby
30​ 	
some shape
```
By making ​square​ block-local, values assigned inside the block will not affect the value of the variable with the same name in the outer scope.

###Implementing Iterators
A Ruby iterator is simply a method that can invoke a block of code.

We said that a block may appear only in the source adjacent to a method call and that the code in the block is not executed at the time it is encountered. Instead, Ruby remembers the context in which the block appears (the local variables, the current object, and so on) and then enters the method. This is where the magic starts.

Within the method, the block may be invoked, almost as if it were a method itself, using the ​yield​ statement. Whenever a ​yield​ is executed, it invokes the code in the block. When the block exits, control picks back up immediately after the ​yield​.[24] Let’s start with a trivial example:
```ruby
​def​ two_times​ 	
  ​yield​​ 	
  ​yield​​ 	
​end​
​ 	
two_times { puts ​"Hello"​ }
```
Produces:
```ruby
Hello​ 	
Hello
```
The block (the code between the braces) is associated with the call to the ​two_times​ method. Within this method, ​yield​ is called two times. Each time, it invokes the code in the block, and a cheery greeting is printed. What makes blocks interesting, however, is that you can pass parameters to them and receive values from them. For example, we could write a simple function that returns members of the Fibonacci series up to a certain value:[25]
```ruby
​def​ fib_up_to(max)​ 	
  i1, i2 = 1, 1        ​# parallel assignment (i1 = 1 and i2 = 1)​​ 	
  ​while​ i1 <= max​ 	
    ​yield​ i1​ 	
    i1, i2 = i2, i1+i2​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​ 	
​ 	
fib_up_to(1000) {|f| print f, ​" "​ }​ 	
puts
```
Produces:
```ruby
1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34 55 89 144 233 377 610 987
```
In this example, the ​yield​ statement has a parameter. This value is passed to the associated block. In the definition of the block, the argument list appears between vertical bars. In this instance, the variable ​f​ receives the value passed to ​yield​, so the block prints successive members of the series. (This example also shows parallel assignment in action. We’ll come back to this later.) Although it is common to pass just one value to a block, this is not a requirement; a block may have any number of arguments.

Some iterators are common to many types of Ruby collections. Let’s look at three: ​each​ , ​collect​ , and ​find​ .

​each​ is probably the simplest iterator—all it does is yield successive elements of its collection:
```ruby
[ 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 ].each {|i| puts i }
```
Produces:
```ruby
1​ 	
3​ 	
5​ 	
7​ 	
9
```
The ​each​ iterator has a special place in Ruby; we’ll describe how it’s used as the basis of the language’s ​for​ loop, and we’ll see how defining an ​each​ method can add a whole lot more functionality to the classes you write–for free.

A block may also return a value to the method. The value of the last expression evaluated in the block is passed back to the method as the value of the ​yield​. This is how the ​find​ method used by class ​Array​ works.[26] Its implementation would look something like the following:
```ruby
​class​ Array​ 	
  ​def​ find​ 	
    each ​do​ |value|​ 	
      ​return​ value ​if​ ​yield​(value)​ 	
    ​end​​ 	
    nil​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​ 	
​ 	
[1, 3, 5, 7, 9].find {|v| v*v > 30 } ​# => 7​
```
This uses ​each​ to pass successive elements of the array to the associated block. If the block returns true (that is, a value other than ​nil​ or ​false​), the method returns the corresponding element. If no element matches, the method returns ​nil​. The example shows the benefit of this approach to iterators. The ​Array​ class does what it does best, accessing array elements, and leaves the application code to concentrate on its particular requirement (in this case, finding an entry that meets some criteria).

Another common iterator is ​collect​ (also known as ​map​ ), which takes each element from the collection and passes it to the block. The results returned by the block are used to construct a new array. The following example uses the ​succ​ method, which increments a string value:
```ruby
[​"H"​, ​"A"​, ​"L"​].collect {|x| x.succ } ​# => ["I", "B", "M"]​
```
Iterators are not limited to accessing existing data in arrays and hashes. As we saw in the Fibonacci example, an iterator can return derived values. This capability is used by Ruby’s input and output classes, which implement an iterator interface that returns successive lines (or bytes) in an I/O stream:
```ruby
f = File.open(​"testfile"​)​ 	
f.each ​do​ |line|​ 	
  puts ​"The line is: ​#{line}​"​​ 	
​end​​ 	

f.close
```
Produces:
```ruby
The line is: This is line one​ 	
The line is: This is line two​ 	
The line is: This is line three​ 	
The line is: And so on...
```
Sometimes you want to keep track of how many times you’ve been through the block. The ​with_index​ method is your friend. It is added as an additional method call after an iterator, and adds a sequence number to each value returned by that iterator. The original value and that sequence number are then passed to the block:
```ruby
f = File.open(​"testfile"​)​ 	
f.each.with_index ​do​ |line, index|​ 	
  puts ​"Line ​#{index}​ is: ​#{line}​"​​ 	
​end​
​ 	
f.close
```
Produces:
```ruby
Line 0 is: This is line one​ 	
Line 1 is: This is line two​ 	
Line 2 is: This is line three​ 	
Line 3 is: And so on...
```
Let’s look at one more useful iterator. The (somewhat obscurely named) ​inject​ method (defined in the module ​Enumerable​) lets you accumulate a value across the members of a collection. For example, you can sum all the elements in an array and find their product using code such as this:
```ruby
[1,3,5,7].inject(0) {|sum, element| sum+element}         ​# => 16​​ 	
[1,3,5,7].inject(1) {|product, element| product*element} ​# => 105
```​
​inject​ works like this: the first time the associated block is called, ​sum​ is set to ​inject​ ’s parameter, and ​element​ is set to the first element in the collection. The second and subsequent times the block is called, ​sum​ is set to the value returned by the block on the previous call. The final value of ​inject​ is the value returned by the block the last time it was called. One more thing: if ​inject​ is called with no parameter, it uses the first element of the collection as the initial value and starts the iteration with the second value. This means that we could have written the previous examples like this:
```ruby
[1,3,5,7].inject {|sum, element| sum+element}         ​# => 16​​ 	
[1,3,5,7].inject {|product, element| product*element} ​# => 105
```​
And, just to add to the mystique of ​inject​ , you can also give it the name of the method you want to apply to successive elements of the collection. These examples work because, in Ruby, addition and multiplication are simply methods on numbers, and ​:+​ is the symbol corresponding to the method +:
```ruby
[1,3,5,7].inject(:+) ​# => 16​​ 	
[1,3,5,7].inject(:*) ​# => 105
```​
###Enumerators—External Iterators
Let’s spend a paragraph comparing Ruby’s approach to iterators to that of languages such as C++ and Java. In Ruby, the basic iterator is internal to the collection—it’s simply a method, identical to any other, that happens to call ​yield​ whenever it generates a new value. The thing that uses the iterator is just a block of code associated with a call to this method.

In other languages, collections don’t contain their own iterators. Instead, they implement methods that generate external helper objects (for example, those based on Java’s ​Iterator​ interface) that carry the iterator state. In this, as in many other ways, Ruby is a transparent language. When you write a Ruby program, you concentrate on getting the job done, not on building scaffolding to support the language itself.

It’s also worth spending another paragraph looking at why Ruby’s internal iterators aren’t always the best solution. One area where they fall down badly is where you need to treat an iterator as an object in its own right (for example, passing the iterator into a method that needs to access each of the values returned by that iterator). It’s also difficult to iterate over two collections in parallel using Ruby’s internal iterator scheme.

Fortunately, Ruby comes with a built-in ​Enumerator​ class, which implements external iterators in Ruby for just such occasions.

You can create an ​Enumerator​ object by calling the ​to_enum​ method (or its synonym, ​enum_for​ ) on a collection such as an array or a hash:
```ruby
a = [ 1, 3, ​"cat"​ ]​ 	
h = { dog: ​"canine"​, fox: ​"vulpine"​ }​ 	
​ 	
​# Create Enumerators​​ 	
enum_a = a.to_enum​ 	
enum_h = h.to_enum​​ 	
enum_a.next ​# => 1​​ 	
enum_h.next ​# => [:dog, "canine"]​​ 	
enum_a.next ​# => 3​​ 	
enum_h.next ​# => [:fox, "vulpine"]​
```
Most of the internal iterator methods—the ones that normally yield successive values to a block—will also return an ​Enumerator​ object if called without a block:
```ruby
a = [ 1, 3, ​"cat"​ ]​ 	
enum_a = a.each ​# create an Enumerator using an internal iterator​​ 	
enum_a.next ​# => 1​​ 	
enum_a.next ​# => 3​
```
Ruby has a method called ​loop​ that does nothing but repeatedly invoke its block. Typically, your code in the block will break out of the loop when some condition occurs. But ​loop​ is also smart when you use an ​Enumerator​—when an enumerator object runs out of values inside a ​loop​ , the loop will terminate cleanly. The following example shows this in action—the loop ends when the three-element enumerator runs out of values.[27]
```ruby
short_enum = [1, 2, 3].to_enum​ 	
long_enum  = (​'a'​..​'z'​).to_enum 	
​ 	
loop ​do​​ 	
  puts ​"​#{short_enum.next}​ - ​#{long_enum.next}​"​​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
1 - a​ 	
2 - b​ 	
3 - c
```
###Enumerators Are Objects
Enumerators take something that’s normally executable code (the act of iterating) and turn it into an object. This means you can do things programmatically with enumerators that aren’t easily done with regular loops.

For example, the ​Enumerable​ module defines ​each_with_index​ . This invokes its host class’s ​each Method​ , returning successive values along with an index:
```ruby
result = []​ 	
[ ​'a'​, ​'b'​, ​'c'​ ].each_with_index {|item, index| result << [item, index] }
​ 	
result    ​# => [["a", 0], ["b", 1], ["c", 2]]​
```
But what if you wanted to iterate and receive an index but use a different method than ​each​ to control that iteration? For example, you might want to iterate over the characters in a string. There’s no method called ​each_char_with_index​ built into the ​String​ class.

Enumerators to the rescue. The ​each_char​ method of strings will return an enumerator if you don’t give it a block, and you can then call ​each_with_index​ on that enumerator:
```ruby
result = []​ 	
​"cat"​.each_char.each_with_index {|item, index| result << [item,  index] }
​ 	
result    ​# => [["c", 0], ["a", 1], ["t", 2]]​
```
In fact, this is such a common use of enumerators that Matz has given us ​with_index​ , which makes the code read better:
```ruby
result = []​ 	
​"cat"​.each_char.with_index {|item, index| result << [item,  index] }
​ 	
result    ​# => [["c", 0], ["a", 1], ["t", 2]]​
```
You can also create the ​Enumerator​ object explicitly—in this case we’ll create one that calls our string’s ​each_char​ method. We can call ​to_a​ on that enumerator to iterate over it:
```ruby
enum = ​"cat"​.enum_for(:each_char)​ 	
enum.to_a ​# => ["c", "a", "t"]​
```
If the method we’re using as the basis of our enumerator takes parameters, we can pass them to ​enum_for​ :
```ruby
enum_in_threes = (1..10).enum_for(:each_slice, 3)​ 	
enum_in_threes.to_a ​# => [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8, 9], [10]]​
```
###Enumerators Are Generators and Filters
​(This is more advanced material that can be skipped on first reading.)​ As well as creating enumerators from existing collections, you can create an explicit enumerator, passing it a block. The code in the block will be used when the enumerator object needs to supply a fresh value to your program. However, the block isn’t simply executed from top to bottom. Instead, the block is executed in parallel with the rest of your program’s code. Execution starts at the top and pauses when the block yields a value to your code. When the code needs the next value, execution resumes at the statement following the ​yield​. This lets you write enumerators that generate infinite sequences (among other things):
```ruby
triangular_numbers = Enumerator.new ​do​ |yielder|​ 	
  number = 0​ 	
  count = 1​ 	
  loop ​do​​ 	
    number += count​ 	
    count += 1​ 	
    yielder.yield number​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​
​ 	 	
5.times { print triangular_numbers.next, ​" "​ }​ 	
puts
```
Produces:
```ruby
1 3 6 10 15
```
Enumerator objects are also enumerable (that is to say, the methods available to enumerable objects are also available to them). That means we can use ​Enumerable​’s methods (such as ​first​ ) on them:
```ruby
triangular_numbers = Enumerator.new ​do​ |yielder|​ 	
  number = 0​ 	
  count = 1​ 	
  loop ​do​​ 	
    number += count​ 	
    count  += 1​ 	
    yielder.yield number​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
p triangular_numbers.first(5)
```
Produces:
```ruby
[1, 3, 6, 10, 15]
```
You have to be slightly careful with enumerators that can generate infinite sequences. Some of the regular ​Enumerator​ methods such as ​count​ and ​select​ will happily try to read the whole enumeration before returning a result. If you want a version of ​select​ that works with infinite sequences, in Ruby 1.9 you’ll need to write it yourself. (Ruby 2 users have a better option, which we discuss in a minute.)«2.0» Here’s a version that gets passed an enumerator and a block and returns a new enumerator containing values from the original for which the block returns true. We’ll use it to return triangular numbers that are multiples of 10.
```ruby
triangular_numbers = Enumerator.new ​do​ |yielder|​ 	
  ​#          ...​​ 	
  ​# as before...​​ 	
  ​#          ...​​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
​def​ infinite_select(enum, &block)​ 	
  Enumerator.new ​do​ |yielder|​ 	
    enum.each ​do​ |value|​ 	
      yielder.yield(value) ​if​ block.call(value)​ 	
    ​end​​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​
​ 	​ 	
p infinite_select(triangular_numbers) {|val| val % 10 == 0}.first(5)
```
Produces:
```ruby
[10, 120, 190, 210, 300]
```
Here we use the ​&block​ notation to pass the block as a parameter to the ​infinite_select​ method.

As Brian Candler pointed out in the ruby-core mailing list (message 19679), you can make this more convenient by adding filters such as ​infinite_select​ directly to the ​Enumerator​ class. Here’s an example that returns the first five triangular numbers that are multiples of 10 and that have the digit 3 in them:
```ruby
triangular_numbers = Enumerator.new ​do​ |yielder|​ 	
  ​# ... as before​​ 	
​end​
​ 	
​class​ Enumerator​ 	
  ​def​ infinite_select(&block)​ 	
    Enumerator.new ​do​ |yielder|​ 	
      self.each ​do​ |value|​ 	
        yielder.yield(value) ​if​ block.call(value)​ 	
      ​end​​ 	
    ​end​​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​
​ 	​ 	
p triangular_numbers​ 	
   .infinite_select {|val| val % 10 == 0}​ 	
   .infinite_select {|val| val.to_s =~ /3/ }​ 	
   .first(5)
```
Produces:
```ruby
[300, 630, 1830, 3160, 3240]
```
###Lazy Enumerators in Ruby 2
As we saw in the previous section, the problem with enumerators that generate infinite sequences is that we have to write special, non-greedy, versions of methods such as ​select​ . Fortunately, if you’re using Ruby 2.0«2.0», you have this support built in.

If you call Enumerator#lazy on any Ruby enumerator, you get back an instance of class ​Enumerator::Lazy​. This enumerator acts just like the original, but it reimplements methods such as ​select​ and ​map​ so that they can work with infinite sequences. Putting it another way, none of the lazy versions of the methods actually consume any data from the collection until that data is requested, and then they only consume enough to satisfy that request.

To work this magic, the lazy versions of the various methods do not return arrays of data. Instead, each returns a new enumerator that includes its own special processing—the ​select​ method returns an enumerator that knows how to apply the select logic to its input collection, the ​map​ enumerator knows how to handle the map logic, and so on. The result is that if you chain a bunch of lazy enumerator methods, what you end up with is a chain of enumerators—the last one in the chain takes values from the one before it, and so on.

Let’s play with this a little. To start, let’s add a helper method to the ​Integer​ class that generates a stream of integers.
```ruby
​def​ Integer.all​ 	
  Enumerator.new ​do​ |yielder, n: 0|​ 	
    loop { yielder.yield(n += 1) }​ 	
  ​end​.lazy​ 	
​end​
​ 	​ 	
p Integer.all.first(10)
```
Produces:
```ruby
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
```
There are a couple of things to note here. First, see how I used a keyword parameter on the block both to declare and initialize a local variable ​n​.[28] Second, see how we convert the basic generator into a lazy enumerator with the call to ​lazy​ after the end of the block.

Calling the ​first​ method on this returns the numbers 1 through 10, but this doesn’t exercise the method’s lazy characteristics. Let’s instead get the first 10 multiples of three.
```ruby
p Integer​ 	
       .all​ 	
       .select {|i| (i % 3).zero? }​ 	
       .first(10)
```
Produces:
```ruby
[3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 27, 30]
```
Without the lazy enumerator, the call to ​select​ would effectively never return, as ​select​ would try to read all the values from the generator. But the lazy version of ​select​ only consumes values on demand, and in this case the subsequent call to ​first​ only asks for 10 values.

Let’s make this a little more complex—how about multiples of 3 whose string representations are palindromes?
```ruby
​def​ palindrome?(n)​ 	
  n = n.to_s​ 	
  n == n.reverse​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
p Integer​ 	
      .all​ 	
      .select { |i| (i % 3).zero? }​ 	
      .select { |i| palindrome?(i) }​ 	
      .first(10)
```
Produces:
```ruby
[3, 6, 9, 33, 66, 99, 111, 141, 171, 222]
```
Remember that our lazy filter methods simply return new ​Enumerator​ objects? That means we can split up the previous code:
```ruby
multiple_of_three = Integer​ 	
      .all​ 	
      .select { |i| (i % 3).zero? }​ 	
​ 	
p multiple_of_three.first(10)​ 	

m3_palindrome = multiple_of_three​ 	
      .select { |i| palindrome?(i) }
​ 	 	
p m3_palindrome.first(10)
```
Produces:
```ruby
[3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 27, 30]​ 	
[3, 6, 9, 33, 66, 99, 111, 141, 171, 222]
```
You could also code up the various predicates as free-standing procs, if you feel it aids readability or reusablility.
```ruby
multiple_of_three = -> n { (n % 3).zero? }​ 	
palindrome        = -> n { n = n.to_s; n == n.reverse }​ 	
​ 	
p Integer​ 	
   .all​ 	
   .select(&multiple_of_three)​ 	
   .select(&palindrome)​ 	
   .first(10)
```
Produces:
```ruby
[3, 6, 9, 33, 66, 99, 111, 141, 171, 222]
```
If you’ve ever played with ​ActiveRelation​ in Rails, you’ll be familiar with this pattern—lazy enumeration methods let us build up a complex filter one piece at a time.

###Blocks for Transactions
Although blocks are often used as the target of an iterator, they have other uses. Let’s look at a few.

You can use blocks to define a chunk of code that must be run under some kind of transactional control. For example, you’ll often open a file, do something with its contents, and then ensure that the file is closed when you finish. Although you can do this using conventional linear code, a version using blocks is simpler (and turns out to be less error prone). A naive implementation (ignoring error handling) could look something like the following:
```ruby
​class​ File​ 	
  ​def​ self.open_and_process(*args)​ 	
    f = File.open(*args)​ 	
    ​yield​ f 	
    f.close()​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
File.open_and_process(​"testfile"​, ​"r"​) ​do​ |file|​ 	
  ​while​ line = file.gets​ 	
    puts line​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
This is line one​ 	
This is line two​ 	
This is line three​ 	
And so on...
```
​open_and_process​ is a ​ class method​ —it may be called independently of any particular file object. We want it to take the same arguments as the conventional ​File.open​ method, but we don’t really care what those arguments are. To do this, we specified the arguments as ​*args​, meaning “collect the actual parameters passed to the method into an array named ​args​.” We then call ​File.open​ , passing it ​*args​ as a parameter. This expands the array back into individual parameters. The net result is that ​open_and_process​ transparently passes whatever parameters it receives to ​File.open​ .

Once the file has been opened, ​open_and_process​ calls ​yield​, passing the open file object to the block. When the block returns, the file is closed. In this way, the responsibility for closing an open file has been shifted from the users of file objects to the file objects themselves.

The technique of having files manage their own life cycle is so useful that the class ​File​ supplied with Ruby supports it directly. If ​File.open​ has an associated block, then that block will be invoked with a file object, and the file will be closed when the block terminates. This is interesting, because it means that ​File.open​ has two different behaviors. When called with a block, it executes the block and closes the file. When called without a block, it returns the file object. This is made possible by the method ​block_given?​ , which returns ​true​ if a block is associated with the current method. Using this method, you could implement something similar to the standard ​File.open​ (again, ignoring error handling) using the following:
```ruby
​class​ File​ 	
  ​def​ self.my_open(*args)​ 	
    result = file = File.new(*args)​ 	
    ​# If there's a block, pass in the file and close the file when it returns​
    ​if​ block_given?​ 	
      result = ​yield​ file​ 	
      file.close​ 	
    ​end​
​ 	
    result
​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​
```
This has one last twist: in the previous examples of using blocks to control resources, we didn’t address error handling. If we wanted to implement these methods properly, we’d need to ensure that we closed a file even if the code processing that file somehow aborted. We do this using exception handling, which we talk about later.

###Blocks Can Be Objects
Blocks are like anonymous methods, but there’s more to them than that. You can also convert a block into an object, store it in variables, pass it around, and then invoke its code later.

Remember we said that you can think of blocks as being like an implicit parameter that’s passed to a method? Well, you can also make that parameter explicit. If the last parameter in a method definition is prefixed with an ampersand (such as ​&action​), Ruby looks for a code block whenever that method is called. That code block is converted to an object of class ​Proc​ and assigned to the parameter. You can then treat the parameter as any other variable.

Here’s an example where we create a ​Proc​ object in one instance method and store it in an instance variable. We then invoke the proc from a second instance method.
```ruby
​class​ ProcExample​ 	
  ​def​ pass_in_block(&action)​ 	
    @stored_proc = action​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ use_proc(parameter)​ 	
    @stored_proc.call(parameter)​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
​end​
​ 	
eg = ProcExample.new​ 	
eg.pass_in_block { |param| puts ​"The parameter is ​#{param}​"​ }
​eg.use_proc(99)
```
Produces:
```ruby
The parameter is 99
```
See how the ​call​ method on a proc object invokes the code in the original block?

Many Ruby programs store and later call blocks in this way—it’s a great way of implementing callbacks, dispatch tables, and so on. But you can go one step further. If a block can be turned into an object by adding an ampersand parameter to a method, what happens if that method then returns the ​Proc​ object to the caller?
```ruby
​def​ create_block_object(&block)​ 	
  block​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
bo = create_block_object { |param| puts ​"You called me with ​#{param}​"​ }​ 	
bo.call 99​ 	
bo.call ​"cat"​
```
Produces:
```ruby
You called me with 99​ 	
You called me with cat
```
In fact, this is so useful that Ruby provides not one but two built-in methods that convert a block to an object.[29] Both ​lambda​ and ​Proc.new​ take a block and return an object of class ​Proc​. The objects they return differ slightly in how they behave, but we’ll hold off talking about that until later.
```ruby
bo = lambda { |param| puts ​"You called me with ​#{param}​"​ }​ 	
bo.call 99​ 	
bo.call ​"cat"​
```
Produces:
```ruby
You called me with 99​ 	
You called me with cat
```
###Blocks Can Be Closures
Remember I said that a block can use local variables from the surrounding scope? So, let’s look at a slightly different example of a block doing just that:
```ruby
​def​ n_times(thing)​ 	
  lambda {|n| thing * n }​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
p1 = n_times(23)​ 	
p1.call(3) ​# => 69​​ 	
p1.call(4) ​# => 92​​ 	
p2 = n_times(​"Hello "​)​ 	
p2.call(3) ​# => "Hello Hello Hello "​
```
The method ​n_times​ returns a ​Proc​ object that references the method’s parameter, ​thing​. Even though that parameter is out of scope by the time the block is called, the parameter remains accessible to the block. This is called a ​ closure​ —variables in the surrounding scope that are referenced in a block remain accessible for the life of that block and the life of any ​Proc​ object created from that block.

Here’s another example—a method that returns a ​Proc​ object that returns successive powers of 2 when called:
```ruby
​def​ power_proc_generator​ 	
  value = 1​ 	
  lambda { value += value }​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
power_proc = power_proc_generator​ 	
puts power_proc.call​ 	
puts power_proc.call​ 	
puts power_proc.call
```
Produces:
```ruby
2​ 	
4​ 	
8
```
###An Alternative Notation
Ruby has another way of creating ​Proc​ objects. Rather than write this:
```ruby
lambda { |params| ... }
```
you can now write the following:[30]
```ruby
-> params { ... }
```
The parameters can be enclosed in optional parentheses. Here’s an example:
```ruby
proc1 = -> arg { puts ​"In proc1 with ​#{arg}​"​ }​ 	
proc2 = -> arg1, arg2 { puts ​"In proc2 with ​#{arg1}​ and ​#{arg2}​"​ }​ 	
proc3 = ->(arg1, arg2) { puts ​"In proc3 with ​#{arg1}​ and ​#{arg2}​"​ }​ 	
proc1.call ​"ant"​​ 	
proc2.call ​"bee"​, ​"cat"​​ 	
proc3.call ​"dog"​, ​"elk"​
```
Produces:
```ruby
In proc1 with ant​ 	
In proc2 with bee and cat​ 	
In proc3 with dog and elk
```
The ​->​ form is more compact than using ​lambda​ and seems to be in favor when you want to pass one or more ​Proc​ objects to a method:
```ruby
​def​ my_if(condition, then_clause, else_clause)​ 	
  ​if​ condition​ 	
    then_clause.call​ 	
  ​else​​ 	
    else_clause.call​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​
​ 	​ 	
5.times ​do​ |val|​ 	
  my_if val < 2,​ 	
        -> { puts ​"​#{val}​ is small"​ },​ 	
        -> { puts ​"​#{val}​ is big"​ }​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
0 is small​ 	
1 is small​ 	
2 is big​ 	
3 is big​ 	
4 is big
```
One good reason to pass blocks to methods is that you can reevaluate the code in those blocks at any time. Here’s a trivial example of reimplementing a ​while​ loop using a method. Because the condition is passed as a block, it can be evaluated each time around the loop:
```ruby
​def​ my_while(cond, &body)​ 	
  ​while​ cond.call​ 	
    body.call​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
a = 0
​ 	​ 	
my_while -> { a < 3 } ​do
​ 	puts a​ 	
   a += 1​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
0​ 	
1​ 	
2
```
###Block Parameter Lists
Blocks written using the old syntax take their parameter lists between vertical bars. Blocks written using the ​->​ syntax take a separate parameter list before the block body. In both cases, the parameter list looks just like the list you can give to methods. It can take default values, splat args (described later), keyword args,«2.0» and a block parameter (a trailing argument starting with an ampersand). You can write blocks that are just as versatile as methods.[31] Here’s a block using the original block notation:
```ruby
proc1 = lambda ​do​ |a, *b, &block|​ 	
  puts ​"a = ​#{a.inspect}​"​​ 	
  puts ​"b = ​#{b.inspect}​"​​ 	
  block.call​ 	
​end​
​
proc1.call(1, 2, 3, 4) { puts ​"in block1"​ }
```
Produces:
```ruby
a = 1​ 	
b = [2, 3, 4]​ 	
in block1
```
And here’s one using the new ​->​ notation:
```ruby
proc2 = -> a, *b, &block ​do​​ 	
  puts ​"a = ​#{a.inspect}​"​​ 	
  puts ​"b = ​#{b.inspect}​"​​ 	
  block.call​ 	
​end​
​ 	
proc2.call(1, 2, 3, 4) { puts ​"in block2"​ }
```
Produces:
```ruby
a = 1​ 	
b = [2, 3, 4]​ 	
in block2
```
