5.1 Inheritance and Messages
====
In the previous chapter, we saw that when ​puts​ needs to convert an object to a string, it calls that object’s ​to_s​ method. But we’ve also written our own classes that don’t explicitly implement ​to_s​ . Despite this, objects of these classes respond successfully when we call ​to_s​ on them. How this works has to do with inheritance, subclassing, and how Ruby determines what method to run when you send a message to an object.

Inheritance allows you to create a class that is a refinement or specialization of another class. This class is called a ​ subclass​ of the original, and the original is a ​ superclass​ of the subclass. People also talk of ​ child​ and ​ parent​ classes.

The basic mechanism of subclassing is simple. The child inherits all of the capabilities of its parent class—all the parent’s instance methods are available in instances of the child.

Let’s look at a trivial example and then later build on it. Here’s a definition of a parent class and a child class that inherits from it:
```ruby
​class​ Parent​ 	
  ​def​ say_hello​ 	
    puts ​"Hello from ​#{self}​"​​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
p = Parent.new​ 	
p.say_hello​ 	
​ 	
​# Subclass the parent...​​ 	
​class​ Child < Parent
​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
c = Child.new​ 	
c.say_hello
```
Produces:
```ruby
Hello from #<Parent:0x007fb87110fd98>​ 	
Hello from #<Child:0x007fb87110fac8>
```
The parent class defines a single instance method, ​say_hello​ . We call it by creating a new instance of the class and store a reference to that instance in the variable ​p​.

We then create a subclass using ​class Child < Parent​. The ​<​ notation means we’re creating a subclass of the thing on the right; the fact that we use less-than presumably signals that the child class is supposed to be a specialization of the parent.

Note that the child class defines no methods, but when we create an instance of it, we can call ​say_hello​ . That’s because the child inherits all the methods of its parent. Note also that when we output the value of ​self​—the current object—it shows that we’re in an instance of class ​Child​, even though the method we’re running is defined in the parent.

The ​superclass​ method returns the parent of a particular class:
```ruby
​class​ Parent
​ 	
​end​
​ 	
​class​ Child < Parent
​ 	
​end​
​ 	
Child.superclass ​# => Parent​
```
But what’s the superclass of ​Parent​?
```ruby
​class​ Parent
​ 	
​end​
​ 	
Parent.superclass ​# => Object​
```
If you don’t define an explicit superclass when defining a class, Ruby automatically makes the built-in class ​Object​ that class’s parent. Let’s go further:
```ruby
Object.superclass ​# => BasicObject​
```
Class ​BasicObject​ is used in certain kinds of metaprogramming, acting as a blank canvas. What’s its parent?
```ruby
BasicObject.superclass.inspect ​# => "nil"​
```
So, we’ve finally reached the end. ​BasicObject​ is the root class of our hierarchy of classes. Given any class in any Ruby application, you can ask for its superclass, then the superclass of that class, and so on, and you’ll eventually get back to ​BasicObject​.

We’ve seen that if you call a method in an instance of class ​Child​ and that method isn’t in ​Child​’s class definition, Ruby will look in the parent class. It goes deeper than that, because if the method isn’t defined in the parent class, Ruby continues looking in the parent’s parent, the parent’s parent’s parent, and so on, through the ancestors until it runs out of classes.

And this explains our original question. We can work out why ​to_s​ is available in just about every Ruby object. ​to_s​ is actually defined in class ​Object​. Because ​Object​ is an ancestor of every Ruby class (except ​BasicObject​), instances of every Ruby class have a ​to_s​ method defined:
```ruby
​class​ Person​ 	
  ​def​ initialize(name)​ 	
    @name = name​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​
​ 	
p = Person.new(​"Michael"​)​ 	
puts p
```
Produces:
```ruby	
#<Person:0x007fa08b8643f8>
```
We saw in the previous chapter that we can override the ​to_s​ method:
```ruby
​class​ Person​ 	
  ​def​ initialize(name)​ 	
    @name = name​ 	
  ​end​
​ 	
  ​def​ to_s​ 	
    ​"Person named ​#{@name}​"​​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​
​ 	​ 	
p = Person.new(​"Michael"​)​ 	
puts p
```
Produces:
```ruby
Person named Michael
```
Armed with our knowledge of subclassing, we now know there’s nothing special about this code. The ​puts​ method calls ​to_s​ on its arguments. In this case, the argument is a ​Person​ object. Because class ​Person​ defines a ​to_s​ method, that method is called. If it hadn’t defined a ​to_s​ method, then Ruby looks for (and finds) ​to_s​ in ​Person​’s parent class, ​Object​.

It is common to use subclassing to add application-specific behavior to a standard library or framework class. If you’ve used Ruby on Rails,[33] you’ll have subclassed ​ActionController​ when writing your own controller classes. Your controllers get all the behavior of the base controller and add their own specific handlers to individual user actions. If you’ve used the FXRuby GUI framework,[34] you’ll have used subclassing to add your own application-specific behavior to FX’s standard GUI widgets.

Here’s a more self-contained example. Ruby comes with a library called GServer that implements basic TCP server functionality. You add your own behavior to it by subclassing the ​GServer​ class. Let’s use that to write some code that waits for a client to connect on a socket and then returns the last few lines of the system log file. This is an example of something that’s actually quite useful in long-running applications—by building in such a server, you can access the internal state of the application while it is running (possibly even remotely).

The ​GServer​ class handles all the mechanics of interfacing to TCP sockets. When you create a ​GServer​ object, you tell it the port to listen on.[35] Then, when a client connects, the ​GServer​ object calls its ​serve​ method to handle that connection. Here’s the implementation of that ​serve​ method in the ​GServer​ class:
```ruby
​def​ serve(io)
​ 	
​end​
```
As you can see, it does nothing. That’s where our own ​LogServer​ class comes in:
```ruby
tut_modules/gserver-logger.rb
​ 	
require ​'gserver'​
​ 	
​class​ LogServer < GServer​ 	
  ​def​ initialize​ 	
    ​super​(12345)​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​ 	
  ​def​ serve(client)​ 	
    client.puts get_end_of_log_file
​ 	​end​
​ 	
private​ 	
  ​def​ get_end_of_log_file​ 	
    File.open(​"/var/log/system.log"​) ​do​ |log|​ 	
      log.seek(-500, IO::SEEK_END)    ​# back up 500 characters from end​​ 	
      log.gets                        ​# ignore partial line​​ 	
      log.read                        ​# and return rest​​ 	
    ​end​​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​​ 	
​ 	
server = LogServer.new​ 	
server.start.join
```
I don’t want to focus too much on the details of running the server. Instead, let’s look at how inheritance has helped us with this code. Notice that our ​LogServer​ class inherits from ​GServer​. This means that a log server is a kind of ​GServer​, sharing all the ​GServer​ functionality. It also means we can add our own specialized behavior.

The first such specialization is the ​initialize​ method. We want our log server to run on TCP port 12345. That’s a parameter that would normally be passed to the ​GServer​ constructor. So, within the ​initialize​ method of the ​LogServer​, we want to invoke the ​initialize​ method of ​GServer​, our parent, passing it the port number. We do that using the Ruby keyword ​super​. When you invoke ​super​, Ruby sends a message to the parent of the current object, asking it to invoke a method of the same name as the method invoking ​super​. It passes this method the parameters that were passed to ​super​.

This is a crucial step and one often forgotten by folks new to OO. When you subclass another class, you are responsible for making sure the initialization required by that class gets run. This means that, unless you know it isn’t needed, you’ll need to put a call to ​super​ somewhere in your subclass’s ​initialize​ method. (If your subclass doesn’t need an ​initialize​ method, then there’s no need to do anything, because it will be the parent class’s ​initialize​ method that gets run when your objects get created.)

So, by the time our ​initialize​ method finishes, our ​LogServer​ object will be a fully fledged TCP server, all without us having to write any protocol-level code. Down at the end of our program, we start the server and then call ​join​ to wait for the server to exit.

Our server receives connections from external clients. These invoke the ​serve​ method in the server object. Remember that empty method in class ​GServer​? Well, our ​LogServer​ class provides its own implementation. And because it gets found by Ruby first when it’s looking for methods to execute, it’s our code that gets run whenever ​GServer​ accepts a connection. And our code reads the last few lines of the log file and returns them to the client:[36]
```ruby
$ ​telnet 127.0.0.1 12345​
​ 	
Trying 127.0.0.1...​ 	
Connected to localhost.​ 	
Escape character is '^]'.​ 	
Jul  9 12:22:59 doc-72-47-70-67 com.apple.mdworker.pool.0[49913]: PSSniffer error​ 	
Jul  9 12:28:55 doc-72-47-70-67 login[82588]: DEAD_PROCESS: 82588 ttys004​ 	
Connection closed by foreign host.
```
The use of the ​serve​ method shows a common idiom when using subclassing. A parent class assumes that it will be subclassed and calls a method that it expects its children to implement. This allows the parent to take on the brunt of the processing but to invoke what are effectively hook methods in subclasses to add application-level functionality. As we’ll see at the end of this chapter, just because this idiom is common doesn’t make it good design.

So, instead, let’s look at ​ mixins​ , a different way of sharing functionality in Ruby code. But, before we look at mixins, we’ll need to get familiar with Ruby ​ modules​ .