5.2 Modules
====
Modules are a way of grouping together methods, classes, and constants. Modules give you two major benefits:

Modules provide a namespace and prevent name clashes.

Modules support the mixin facility.

Namespaces
As you start to write bigger Ruby programs, you’ll find yourself producing chunks of reusable code—libraries of related routines that are generally applicable. You’ll want to break this code into separate files so the contents can be shared among different Ruby programs.

Often this code will be organized into classes, so you’ll probably stick a class (or a set of interrelated classes) into a file. However, there are times when you want to group things together that don’t naturally form a class.

An initial approach may be to put all these things into a file and simply load that file into any program that needs it. This is the way the C language works. However, this approach has a problem. Say you write a set of the trigonometry functions, ​sin​ , ​cos​ , and so on. You stuff them all into a file, ​trig.rb​, for future generations to enjoy. Meanwhile, Sally is working on a simulation of good and evil, and she codes a set of her own useful routines, including ​be_good​ and ​sin​ , and sticks them into ​moral.rb​. Joe, who wants to write a program to find out how many angels can dance on the head of a pin, needs to load both ​trig.rb​ and ​moral.rb​ into his program. But both define a method called ​sin​ . Bad news.

The answer is the module mechanism. Modules define a ​ namespace​ , a sandbox in which your methods and constants can play without having to worry about being stepped on by other methods and constants. The trig functions can go into one module:
```ruby
tut_modules/trig.rb
​ 	
​module​ Trig​	
  PI = 3.141592654​ 	
  ​def​ Trig.sin(x)​ 	
   ​# ..​​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​ 	
  ​def​ Trig.cos(x)​ 	
   ​# ..​​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​
```
and the good and bad “moral” methods can go into another:
```ruby
tut_modules/moral.rb
​ 	
​module​ Moral​ 	
  VERY_BAD = 0​ 	
  BAD      = 1​ 	
  ​def​ Moral.sin(badness)​ 	
    ​# ...​​ 	
  ​end​​ 	
​end​
```
Module constants are named just like class constants, with an initial uppercase letter.[37] The method definitions look similar, too: module methods are defined just like class methods.

If a third program wants to use these modules, it can simply load the two files (using the Ruby ​require​ statement). To reference the name ​sin​ unambiguously, our code can then qualify the name using the name of the module containing the implementation we want, followed by ​::​, the scope resolution operator:
```ruby
tut_modules/pin_head.rb
​ 	
require_relative ​'trig'​​ 	
require_relative ​'moral'​
​ 	
y = Trig.sin(Trig::PI/4)
wrongdoing = Moral.sin(Moral::VERY_BAD)
```
As with class methods, you call a module method by preceding its name with the module’s name and a period, and you reference a constant using the module name and two colons.