5.6 Inheritance, Mixins, and Design
====
Inheritance and mixins both allow you to write code in one place and effectively inject that code into multiple classes. So, when do you use each?

As with most questions of design, the answer is, well...it depends. However, over the years developers have come up with some pretty clear general guidelines to help us decide.

First let’s look at subclassing. Classes in Ruby are related to the idea of types. It would be natural to say that ​"cat"​ is a string and ​[1,2]​ is an array. And that’s another way of saying that the class of ​"cat"​ is ​String​ and the class of ​[1,2]​ is ​Array​. When we create our own classes, you can think of it as adding new types to the language. And when we subclass either a built-in class or our own class, we’re creating a ​ subtype​ .

Now, a lot of research has been done on type theories. One of the more famous results is the ​ Liskov Substitution Principle​ . Formally, this states, “Let q(x) be a property provable about objects x of type T. Then q(y) should be true for objects y of type S where S is a subtype of T.” What this means is that you should be able to substitute an object of a child class wherever you use an object of the parent class—the child should honor the parent’s contract. There’s another way of looking at this: we should be able to say that the child object ​is a​ kind of the parent. We’re used to saying this in English: a car ​is a​ vehicle, a cat ​is an​ animal, and so on. This means that a cat should, at the very least, be capable of doing everything we say that an animal can do.

So, when you’re looking for subclassing relationships while designing your application, be on the lookout for these ​is-a​ relationships.

But...here’s the bad news. In the real world, there really aren’t that many true ​is a​ relationships. Instead, it’s far more common to have ​has a​ or ​uses a​ relationships between things. The real world is built using composition, not strict hierarchies.

In the past, we’ve tended to gloss over that fact when programming. Because inheritance was the only scheme available for sharing code, we got lazy and said things like “My ​Person​ class is a subclass of my ​DatabaseWrapper​ class.” (Indeed, the Rails framework makes just this mistake.) But a person object ​is not​ a kind of database wrapper object. A person object ​uses​ a database wrapper to provide persistence services.

Is this just a theoretical issue? No! Inheritance represents an incredibly tight coupling of two components. Change a parent class, and you risk breaking the child class. But, even worse, if code that uses objects of the child class relies on those objects also having methods defined in the parent, then all that code will break, too. The parent class’s implementation leaks through the child classes and out into the rest of the code. With a decent-sized program, this becomes a serious inhibitor to change.

And that’s why we need to move away from inheritance in our designs. Instead, we need to be using ​composition​ wherever we see a case of A ​uses a​ B, or A ​has a​ B. Our persisted ​Person​ object won’t subclass ​DataWrapper​. Instead, it’ll construct a reference to a database wrapper object and use that object reference to save and restore itself.

But that can also make code messy. And that’s where a combination of mixins and metaprogramming comes to the rescue, because we can say this:
```ruby
​class​ Person​ 	
  include Persistable​ 	
  ​# ...​​ 	
​end​

#instead of this:
​class​ Person < DataWrapper
​  ​# ...​
​​end​
```
If you’re new to object-oriented programming, this discussion may feel remote and abstract. But as you start to code larger and larger programs, we urge you to think about the issues discussed here. Try to reserve inheritance for the times where it is justified. And try to explore all the cool ways that mixins let you write decoupled, flexible code.

Footnotes
[32]	
Why? Because the world changes. And when you adapt your application to each change, you want to know that you’ve changed exactly the code you need to change. If each real-world concept is implemented at a single point in the code, this becomes vastly easier.

[33]	
​http://www.rubyonrails.com​

[34]	
​http://www.fxruby.org/​

[35]	
You can tell it a lot more, as well. We chose to keep it simple here.

[36]	
You can also access this server from a web browser by connecting to ​http://127.0.0.1:12345​.

[37]	
But we will conventionally use all uppercase letters when writing them.

[38]	
Of course, we’re speaking only of methods here. Instance variables are always per object, for example.