7.2 Ruby’s Regular Expressions
====
There are many ways of creating a regular expression pattern. By far the most common is to write it between forward slashes. Thus, the pattern ​`/cat/​` is a regular expression literal in the same way that ​"cat"​ is a string literal.

​/cat/​ is an example of a simple, but very common, pattern. It matches any string that contains the substring ​`cat`​. In fact, inside a pattern, all characters except `., |, (, ), [, ], {, }, +, \, ^, $, *, and ?` match themselves. So, at the risk of creating something that sounds like a logic puzzle, here are some patterns and examples of strings they match and don’t match:
```ruby
​/cat/​   	Matches ​"dog and cat"​ and ​"catch"​ but not ​"Cat"​ or ​"c.a.t."​
​/123/​     Matches ​"86512312"​ and ​"abc123"​ but not ​"1.23"​
​/t a b/​   Matches ​"hit a ball"​ but not ​"table"​
```
If you want to match one of the special characters literally in a pattern, precede it with a backslash, so ​`/\*/​ `is a pattern that matches a single asterisk, and ​`/\//​` is a pattern that matches a forward slash.

Pattern literals are like double-quoted strings. In particular, you can use ​`#{...}​` expression substitutions in the pattern.

Matching Strings with Patterns
The Ruby operator `​=~​` matches a string against a pattern. It returns the character offset into the string at which the match occurred:
```ruby
/cat/ =~ ​"dog and cat"​ ​# => 8​​ 	
/cat/ =~ ​"catch"​       ​# => 0​​ 	
/cat/ =~ ​"Cat"​         ​# => nil
```
You can put the string first if you prefer:[42]
```ruby
​"dog and cat"​ =~ /cat/ ​# => 8​​ 	
​"catch"​ =~ /cat/       ​# => 0​​ 	
​"Cat"​ =~ /cat/         ​# => nil
```​
Because pattern matching returns ​nil​ when it fails and because `​nil​` is equivalent to ​`false`​ in a boolean context, you can use the result of a pattern match as a condition in statements such as ​if​ and ​while​.
```ruby
str = ​"cat and dog"​	
​ 	
​if​ str =~ /cat/​ 	
  puts ​"There's a cat here somewhere"​​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
There's a cat here somewhere
```
The following code prints lines in ​testfile​ that have the string `​on`​ in them:
```ruby
File.foreach(​"testfile"​).with_index ​do​ |line, index|​ 	
  puts ​"​#{index}​: ​#{line}​"​ ​if​ line =~ /on/​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
0: This is line one​ 	
3: And so on...
```
You can test to see whether a pattern does not match a string using `!~​`:
```ruby
File.foreach(​"testfile"​).with_index ​do​ |line, index|​ 	
  puts ​"​#{index}​: ​#{line}​"​ ​if​ line !~ /on/​ 	
​end​
```
Produces:
```ruby
1: This is line two​ 	
2: This is line three
```
###Changing Strings with Patterns

The ​sub​ method takes a pattern and some replacement text.[43] If it finds a match for the pattern in the string, it replaces the matched substring with the replacement text.
```ruby
str = ​"Dog and Cat"​​ 	
new_str = str.sub(/Cat/, ​"Gerbil"​)​ 	
puts ​"Let's go to the ​#{new_str}​ for a pint."
```​
Produces:
```ruby
Let's go to the Dog and Gerbil for a pint.
```
The ​sub​ method changes only the first match it finds. To replace all matches, use ​`gsub`​ . (The ​g​ stands for global.)
```ruby
str = ​"Dog and Cat"​​ 	
new_str1 = str.sub(/a/, ​"*"​)​ 	
new_str2 = str.gsub(/a/, ​"*"​)​ 	
puts ​"Using sub: ​#{new_str1}​"​​ 	
puts ​"Using gsub: ​#{new_str2}​"
```
Produces:
```ruby
Using sub: Dog *nd Cat​ 	
Using gsub: Dog *nd C*t
```
Both ​`sub`​ and `​gsub`​ return a new string. (If no substitutions are made, that new string will just be a copy of the original.)

If you want to modify the original string, use the ​sub!​ and ​gsub!​ forms:
```ruby
str = ​"now is the time"​​ 	
str.sub!(/i/, ​"*"​)​ 	
str.gsub!(/t/, ​"T"​)​ 	
puts str
```
Produces:
```ruby
now *s The Time
```
Unlike ​`sub`​ and ​`gsub`​ , ​`sub!`​ and `​gsub!`​ return the string only if the pattern was matched. If no match for the pattern is found in the string, they return ​nil​ instead. This means it can make sense (depending on your need) to use the ! forms in conditions.

So, at this point you know how to use patterns to look for text in a string and how to substitute different text for those matches. And, for many people, that’s enough. So if you’re itching to get on to other Ruby topics, now is a good time to move on to the next chapter. At some point, you’ll likely need to do something more complex with regular expressions (for example, matching a time by looking for two digits, a colon, and two more digits). You can then come back and read the next section.

Or, you can just stay right here as we dig deeper into patterns, matches, and replacements.